The Project Gutenberg EBook of The eBook is 40 (1971-2011), by Marie Lebert

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **

Title: The eBook is 40 (1971-2011)

Author: Marie Lebert

Release Date: August 6, 2011 [EBook #36985]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EBOOK IS 40 (1971-2011) ***




Produced by Al Haines




THE EBOOK IS 40 (1971-2011)

Marie Lebert

Project Gutenberg News, 2011



INTRODUCTION


The ebook (electronic book) is 40 years old. After humble beginnings,
it is firmly standing alongside the print book. We now read ebooks on
our computers, PDAs, mobile phones, smartphones and ebook readers.

“The ebook is 40” is a chronology in  44 episodes from 1971 to 2011.
Unless specified otherwise, the quotes are excerpts from the NEF
Interviews <www.etudes-francaises.net/entretiens/>, University of
Toronto, and the interviews that followed as a complement. Many thanks
to all those who are quoted here, for their time and their friendship.

Part of this book was published as a series of articles in Project
Gutenberg News <www.gutenbergnews.org> in July 2011, to celebrate the
40th anniversary of Project Gutenberg on 4 July 2011.

This book marks the very end of a 12-year research project, with 100
participants worldwide.

Marie Lebert is a researcher and journalist specializing in technology
for books and languages. Her books are freely available in Project
Gutenberg <www.gutenberg.org>, in various formats for any electronic
device.

Copyright © 2011 Marie Lebert



TABLE OF CONTENTS


1971 > Project Gutenberg, a visionary project
1974 > The internet “took off”
1990 > The invention of the web
1991 > From ASCII to Unicode
1992 > Homes for electronic texts
1993 > The Online Books Page
1993 > PDF, from past to present
1994 > The internet as a marketing tool
1995 > The print press went online
1995 > Amazon, a pioneer in cybercommerce
1996 > The Internet Archive, for future generations
1996 > Libraries launched websites
1996 > Towards a digital knowledge
1996 > The @folio project, a mobile device for texts
1997 > Multimedia convergence
1997 > A portal for European national libraries
1997 > E Ink, an electronic ink technology
1998 > The Electronic Beowulf Project
1998 > Web-extended commercial books
1998 > A more restrictive copyright law
1998 > The first ebook readers
1999 > Librarians in cyberspace
1999 > The Ulysses Bookstore on the web
1999 > The internet as a novel character
2000 > Encyclopedias and dictionaries
2000 > The web portal yourDictionary.com
2000 > A standard format for ebooks
2000 > Experiments by best-selling authors
2000 > Cotres.net, works of digital literature
2000 > The Gutenberg Bible online
2001 > Broadband became the norm
2001 > Wikipedia, a collaborative encyclopedia
2001 > The Creative Commons license
2003 > Handicapzéro, the internet for everyone
2003 > The Public Library of Science
2004 > The web 2.0, community and sharing
2005 > From PDAs to smartphones
2005 > From Google Print to Google Books
2005 > The Open Content Alliance, a universal library
2006 > The union catalog WorldCat on the web
2007 > The Encyclopedia of Life, a global effort
2007 > The future of ebooks seen from France
2010 > From the Librié to the iPad
2011 > The ebook in ten points



1971 > PROJECT GUTENBERG, A VISIONARY PROJECT


[Summary]
The first ebook was available in July 1971, as eText #1 of Project
Gutenberg, a visionary project launched by Michael Hart to create free
electronic versions of literary works and disseminate them worldwide.
In the 16th century, Gutenberg allowed anyone to have print books for a
small cost. In the 21st century, Project Gutenberg would allow anyone
to have a digital library at no cost. First considered as totally
unrealistic, the project got its first boost with the invention of the
web in 1990, which made it easier to distribute ebooks and recruit
volunteers, and its second boost with the creation of Distributed
Proofreaders in 2000, to share the proofreading of ebooks between
thousands of volunteers. In 2011, for its 40th anniversary, Project
Gutenberg offered 36,000 ebooks being downloaded by the tens of
thousands every day, with websites in the United States, in Australia,
in Europe, and in Canada, and 40 mirror websites worldwide.

***

The first ebook was available in July 1971, as eText #1 of Project
Gutenberg, a visionary project launched by Michael Hart to create free
electronic versions of literary works and disseminate them worldwide.

In the 16th century, Gutenberg allowed anyone to have print books for a
small cost. In the 21st century, Project Gutenberg would allow anyone
to have a digital library at no cost.

# Beginning

As recalled by Michael Hart in January 2009 in an email interview: "On
July 4, 1971, while still a freshman at the University of Illinois
(UI), I decided to spend the night at the Xerox Sigma V mainframe at
the UI Materials Research Lab, rather than walk miles home in the
summer heat, only to come back hours later to start another day of
school. I stopped on the way to do a little grocery shopping to get
through the night, and day, and along with the groceries they put in
the faux parchment copy of 'The U.S. Declaration of Independence' that
became quite literally the cornerstone of Project Gutenberg. That
night, as it turned out, I received my first computer account  -- I had
been hitchhiking on my brother's best friend's name, who ran the
computer on the night shift.  When I got a first look at the huge
amount of computer money I was given, I decided I had to do something
extremely worthwhile to do justice to what I had been given. (…) As I
emptied out groceries, the faux parchment ‘Declaration of Independence’
fell out, and the light literally went on over my head like in the
cartoons and comics... I knew what the future of computing, and the
internet, was going to be... 'The Information Age.' The rest, as they
say, is history."

Michael typed in the “U.S. Declaration of Independence” in upper case,
because there was no lower case yet. He mentioned where the 5 K file
was stored to the 100 users of the embryonic internet of the time,
though without a hypertext link, because the web was still 20 years
ahead. It was downloaded by six users.

Michael decided to search the books from public domain available in
libraries, digitize these books and store their electronic versions.
Project Gutenberg's mission would be the following: to put at
everyone's disposal, in electronic versions, as many literary works
from public domain as possible for free.

First considered as totally unrealistic, the project got its first
boost with the invention of the web in 1990, which made it easier to
distribute ebooks and recruit volunteers.

Years later, in August 1998, Michael wrote in an email interview: "We
consider etext to be a new medium, with no real relationship to paper,
other than presenting the same material, but I don't see how paper can
possibly compete once people each find their own comfortable way to
etexts, especially in schools."

A book became a continuous text file instead of a set of pages, using
the low set of ASCII, called Plain Vanilla ASCII, with caps for the
terms in italic, bold or underlined of the print version, for it to be
read on any hardware and software. As a text file, a book would be
easily copied, indexed, searched, analyzed and compared with other
books.

# Distributed Proofreaders

The project got its second boost with the creation of Distributed
Proofreaders in 2000, to share the proofreading of ebooks between
thousands of volunteers.

Distributed Proofreaders was launched in October 2000 by Charles Franks
to support the digitization of public domain books and assist Project
Gutenberg in its efforts to offer free electronic versions of literary
works. The books are scanned from a print version and converted into a
text version by using OCR, 99% reliable at the best, which leaves a few
errors per page. Volunteers choose one of the books available on the
site and proofread a given page. It is recommended they do a page per
day if possible.

Distributed Proofreaders became the main source of Project Gutenberg's
ebooks, and an official Project Gutenberg site in 2002. Distributed
Proofreaders became a separate legal entity in May 2006 and continues
to maintain a strong relationship with Project Gutenberg. 10,000 books
were digitized, proofread, and "preserved for the world" in December
2006, and 20,000 ebooks in April 2011, as “unique titles [sent] to the
bookshelves of Project Gutenberg, free to enjoy for everybody. (…)
Distributed Proofreaders is a truly international community. People
from over the world contribute.” Distributed Proofreaders Europe (DP
Europe) began production in early 2004. Distributed Proofreaders Canada
(DP Canada) began production in December 2007.

# “Less is more”

Project Gutenberg keeps its administrative and financial structure to
the bare minimum. Its motto fits into three words: "Less is more." The
minimal rules give much space to volunteers and to new ideas. The goal
is to ensure its independence from loans and other funding and from
ephemeral cultural priorities, to avoid pressure from politicians and
others. The aim is also to ensure respect for the volunteers, who can
be confident their work will be used not just for a few years but for
generations. Volunteers can network through mailing lists, weekly or
monthly newsletters, discussion lists, forums, wikis and blogs.

In July 2011, for its 40th anniversary, Project Gutenberg offered
36,000 ebooks being downloaded by the tens of thousands every day, with
websites in the United States, in Australia, in Europe, and in Canada,
and 40 mirror websites worldwide.

40 years after the beginning of Project Gutenberg, Michael Hart
describes himself as a workaholic who has devoted his entire life to
his project. He considers himself a pragmatic and farsighted altruist.
For years he was regarded as a nut but now he is respected.

Michael has often stated in his writings that, after Gutenberg allowing
anyone to have its own print books for a small cost, Project Gutenberg
would allow anyone to have a library at no cost stored in a pocket
device. The collection of Project Gutenberg has the size of a local
public library, but this time available on the web to be downloaded for
free. The project’s goal is to change the world through freely
available ebooks that can be used and copied endlessly, and reading and
culture for everyone at minimal cost.



1974 > THE INTERNET “TOOK OFF”


[Summary]
The internet “took off” in 1974 with the creation of TCP/IP
(Transmission Control Protocol / Internet Protocol) by Vinton Cerf and
Bob Kahn, fifteen years before the invention of the web. The internet
expanded as a network linking U.S. governmental agencies, universities
and research centers, before spreading worldwide in 1983. The internet
got its first boost in 1990 with the invention of the web by Tim
Berners-Lee, and its second boost in 1993 with the release of Mosaic,
the first browser for the general public. The Internet Society (ISOC)
was founded in 1992 by Vinton Cerf to promote the development of the
internet as a medium that was becoming part of our lives. There were
100 million internet users in December 1997, with one million new users
per month, and 300 million users in December 2000.

***

The internet “took off” in 1974 with the creation of TCP/IP
(Transmission Control Protocol / Internet Protocol) by Vinton Cerf and
Bob Kahn, fifteen years before the invention of the web.

# A new medium

The internet expanded as a network linking U.S. governmental agencies,
universities and research centers, before spreading worldwide in 1983.

The internet got its first boost in 1990 with the invention of the web
by Tim Berners-Lee, and its second boost in 1993 with the release of
Mosaic, the first browser for the general public.

Vinton Cerf founded the Internet Society (ISOC) in 1992 to promote the
development of the internet as a medium that was becoming part of our
lives. When interviewed by the French daily Libération on 16 January
1998, he explained that the internet was doing two things. Like books,
it could accumulate knowledge. But, more importantly, it presented
knowledge in a way that connected it with other information whereas, in
a book, information stayed isolated.

Because the web was easy to use with hyperlinks going from one document
to the next, the internet could now be used by anyone, and not only by
computer literate users. There were 100 million internet users in
December 1997, with one million new users per month, and 300 million
users in December 2000.

# A worldwide expansion

North America was leading the way in computer science and communication
technology, with significant funding and cheap computers compared to
Europe. A connection to the internet was much cheaper too.

In some European countries, internet users needed to surf the web at
night (including the author of these lines), when phone rates by the
minute were cheaper, to cut their expenses. In late 1998 and early
1999, some users in France, Germany and Italy launched a movement to
boycott the internet one day per week, as a way to force internet
providers and phone companies to set up a special monthly rate. This
action paid off, and providers began to offer "internet rates".

In summer 1999, the number of internet users living outside the U.S.
reached 50%.

In summer 2000, the number of internet users having a mother tongue
other than English also reached 50%, and went on steadily increasing
then. According to statistics regularly published on the website of
Global Reach, a marketing consultancy promoting internationalization
and localization, they were 52.5% in summer 2001, 57% in December 2001,
59.8% in April 2002, 64.4% in September 2003 (including 34.9% non-
English-speaking Europeans and 29.4% Asians), and 64.2% in March 2004
(including 37.9% non-English-speaking Europeans and 33% Asians).

Broadband became the norm over the years. Jean-Paul, webmaster of the
hypermedia website cotres.net, summarized things in January 2007: “I
feel that we are experiencing a ‘floating’ period between the heroic
ages, when we were moving forward while waiting for the technology to
catch up, and the future, when high-speed broadband will unleash forces
that just begin to move, for now only in games.”

# The internet of the future

The internet of the future could be a “pervasive” network allowing us
to connect in any place and at any time on any device through a single
omnipresent network.

The concept of a “pervasive” network was developed by Rafi Haladjian,
founder of the European company Ozone, who explained on its website in
2007 that “the new wave would affect the physical world, our real
environment, our daily life in every moment. We will not access the
network any more, we will live in it. The future components of this
network (wired parts, non wired parts, operators) will be transparent
to the final user. The network will always be open, providing a
permanent connection anywhere. It will also be agnostic in terms of
applications, as a network based on the internet protocols themselves.”
We do look forward to this.

As for the content of the internet, Timothy Leary, a visionary writer,
described it in 1994 in his book “Chaos & Cyber Culture” as gigantic
glass towers containing the whole world information, with free access,
through the cyberspace, not only to all books, but also to all
pictures, all movies, all TV shows, and all other data. In 2011, we are
not there yet, but we are getting there.



1990 > THE INVENTION OF THE WEB


[Summary]
The World Wide Web was invented in 1990 by Tim Berners-Lee at CERN
(European Center for Nuclear Research, that later became the European
Organization for Nuclear Research), Geneva, Switzerland. In 1989, Tim
Berners-Lee networked documents using hypertext. In 1990, he developed
the first HTTP (HyperText Transfer Protocol) server and the first web
browser. In 1991, the web was operational and radically changed the way
people were using the internet. Hypertext links allowed us to move from
one textual or visual document to another with a simple click of the
mouse. Information became interactive, thus more attractive to many
users. Later on, this interactivity was further enhanced with
hypermedia links that could link texts and images with video and sound.
The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) was founded in October 1994 to
develop protocols for the web.

***

The World Wide Web was invented in 1990 by Tim Berners-Lee, a
researcher at CERN (European Center for Nuclear Research), Geneva,
Switzerland, who made the internet accessible to all.

# How the web started

In 1989, Tim Berners-Lee networked documents using hypertext. In 1990,
he developed the first HTTP (HyperText Transfer Protocol) server and
the first web browser. In 1991, the web was operational and made the
internet accessible to all. Hypertext links allowed us to move from one
textual or visual document to another with a simple click of the mouse.
Information became interactive, thus more attractive to many users.
Later on, this interactivity was further enhanced with hypermedia links
that could link texts and images with video and sound.

Developed by NCSA (National Center for Supercomputing Applications) at
the University of Illinois (USA) and distributed free of charge in
November 1993, Mosaic was the first browser for the general public, and
contributed greatly to the  development of the web. In early 1994, part
of the Mosaic team migrated to the Netscape Communications Corporation
to develop a new browser called Netscape Navigator. In 1995, Microsoft
launched its own browser, the Internet Explorer. Other browsers were
launched then, like Opera and Safari, Apple's browser.

The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) was founded in October 1994 to
develop interoperable technologies (specifications, guidelines,
software, other tools) for the web, for example specifications for
markup languages (HTML, XML and others). It also acted as a forum for
information, commerce, communication and collective understanding. In
1998, the section Internationalization/Localization gave access to some
protocols for creating a multilingual website: HTML, base character
set, new tags and attributes, HTTP, language negotiation, URLs and
other identifiers including non-ASCII characters, etc.

# Tim Berners-Lee’s dream

Pierre Ruetschi, a journalist for the Swiss daily “Tribune de Genève”,
asked Tim Berners-Lee on 20 December 1997: "Seven years later, are you
satisfied with the way the web has evolved?". He answered that, if he
was pleased with the richness and diversity of information, the web
still lacked the power planned in its original design. He would like
"the web to be more interactive, and people to be able to create
information together", and not only to be information consumers. The
web was supposed to become a "medium for collaboration, a world of
knowledge that we share."

In an essay posted on his webpage, Tim Berners-Lee wrote in May 1998:
"The dream behind the web is of a common information space in which we
communicate by sharing information. Its universality is essential: the
fact that a hypertext link can point to anything, be it personal, local
or global, be it draft or highly polished. There was a second part of
the dream, too, dependent on the web being so generally used that it
became a realistic mirror (or in fact the primary embodiment) of the
ways in which we work and play and socialize. That was that once the
state of our interactions was online, we could then use computers to
help us analyze it, make sense of what we are doing, where we
individually fit in, and how we can better work together." (excerpt
from "The World Wide Web: A very short personal history")

# The web 2.0

According to Netcraft, a company tracking data on the internet, the
number of websites went from one million (April 1997) to 10 million
(February 2000), 20 million (September 2000), 30 million (July 2001),
40 million (April 2003), 50 million (May 2004), 60 million (March
2005), 70 million (August 2005), 80 million (April 2006), 90 million
(August 2006) and 100 million (November 2006), with a growing number of
personal websites and blogs.

The term “web 2.0” was invented in 2004 by Tim O’Reilly, a publisher of
computer books, as a title for a series of conferences he was
organizing. The web 2.0 may begin to answer Tim Berners-Lee’s dream as
a web based on community and sharing, with many collaborative projects
across borders and languages.

Fifteen years after the invention the web, Wired stated in its August
2005 issue that less than half of the web was commercial, with the
other half being run by passion. As for the internet, according to the
French daily Le Monde dated 19 August 2005, its three powers --
ubiquity, variety and interactivity -- made its potential use quasi
infinite.

Robert Beard, a language teacher at Bucknell University, Pennsylvania,
and the founder of A Web of Online Dictionaries in 1995, wrote as early
as September 1998: "The web will be an encyclopedia of the world by the
world for the world. There will be no information or knowledge that
anyone needs that will not be available. The major hindrance to
international and interpersonal understanding, personal and
institutional enhancement, will be removed. It would take a wilder
imagination than mine to predict the effect of this development on the
nature of humankind."



1991 > FROM ASCII TO UNICODE


[Summary]
Used since the beginning of computing, ASCII (American Standard Code
for Information Interchange) is a 7-bit coded character set for
information interchange in English. It was published in 1963 by ANSI
(American National Standards Institute). With the internet spreading
worldwide, to communicate in English (and Latin) was not enough
anymore. The accented characters of several European languages and
characters of some other languages were taken into account from 1986
onwards with 8-bit variants of ASCII, also called extended ASCII, that
provided sets of 256 characters. But problems were not over until the
publication of Unicode in January 1991 as a new universal encoding
system. Unicode provided "a unique number for every character, no
matter what the platform, no matter what the program, no matter what
the language", and could handle 65,000 characters or ideograms.

***

With the internet spreading worldwide, the use of ASCII and extended
ASCII was not enough anymore, thus the need to take into account all
languages with Unicode, whose first version was published in January
1991.

Used since the beginning of computing, ASCII (American Standard Code
for Information Interchange) is a 7-bit coded character set for
information interchange in English (and Latin). It was published in
1963 by ANSI (American National Standards Institute). The 7-bit plain
ASCII, also called Plain Vanilla ASCII, is a set of 128 characters with
95 printable unaccented characters (A-Z, a-z, numbers, punctuation and
basic symbols), the ones that are available on the American / English
keyboard.

With computer technology spreading outside North America, the accented
characters of several European languages and characters of some other
languages were taken into account from 1986 onwards with 8-bit variants
of ASCII, also called extended ASCII, that provided sets of 256
characters.

Brian King, director of the WorldWide Language Institute (WWLI),
explained in September 1998: “Computer technology has traditionally
been the sole domain of a 'techie' elite, fluent in both complex
programming languages and in English  -- the universal language of
science and technology. Computers were never designed to handle writing
systems that couldn't be translated into ASCII. There wasn't much room
for anything other than the 26 letters of the English alphabet in a
coding system that originally couldn't even recognize acute accents and
umlauts  -- not to mention non-alphabetic systems like Chinese. But
tradition has been turned upside down. Technology has been popularized.
(…)

An extension of (local) popularization is the export of information
technology around the world. Popularization has now occurred on a
global scale and English is no longer necessarily the lingua franca of
the user. Perhaps there is no true lingua franca, but only the
individual languages of the users. One thing is certain  -- it is no
longer necessary to understand English to use a computer, nor it is
necessary to have a degree in computer science. A pull from non-
English-speaking computer users and a push from technology companies
competing for global markets has made localization a fast growing area
in software and hardware development. This development has not been as
fast as it could have been. The first step was for ASCII to become
extended ASCII. This meant that computers could begin to start
recognizing the accents and symbols used in variants of the English
alphabet  -- mostly used by European languages. But only one language
could be displayed on a page at a time. (...)

The most recent development [in 1998] is Unicode. Although still
evolving and only just being incorporated into the latest software,
this new coding system translates each character into 16 bits. Whereas
8-bit extended ASCII could only handle a maximum of 256 characters,
Unicode can handle over 65,000 unique characters and therefore
potentially accommodate all of the world's writing systems on the
computer. So now the tools are more or less in place. They are still
not perfect, but at last we can surf the web in Chinese, Japanese,
Korean, and numerous other languages that don't use the Western
alphabet. As the internet spreads to parts of the world where English
is rarely used  -- such as China, for example, it is natural that
Chinese, and not English, will be the preferred choice for interacting
with it. For the majority of the users in China, their mother tongue
will be the only choice."

First published in January 1991, Unicode "provides a unique number for
every character, no matter what the platform, no matter what the
program, no matter what the language" (excerpt from the website). This
double-byte platform-independent encoding provides a basis for the
processing, storage and interchange of text data in any language.
Unicode is maintained by the Unicode Consortium, with its variants UTF-
8, UTF-16 and UTF-32 (UTF: Unicode Transformation Format), and is a
component of the specifications of the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C).
Unicode has replaced ASCII for text files on Windows platforms since
1998.  Unicode surpassed ASCII on the internet in December 2007.



1992 > HOMES FOR ELECTRONIC TEXTS


[Summary]
The first homes for electronic texts were the Etext Archives, founded
in 1992 by Paul Southworth, and the E-Zine-List, founded in 1993 by
John Labovitz, among others. The first electronic texts were mostly
political. They were followed by electronic zines also covering
cultural topics, and not targeted towards a mass audience, at least
during the first years. The Etext Archives, hosted on the website of
the University of Michigan, were "home to electronic texts of all
kinds, from the sacred to the profane, and from the political to the
personal", without judging their content. The E-Zine-List was a
directory of e-zines around the world, accessible via FTP, gopher,
email, the web and other services. The list was updated monthly. 3,045
zines were listed in November 1998. John wrote on its website: "Now the
e-zine world is different. (…) Even the term 'e-zine' has been co-opted
by the commercial world, and has come to mean nearly any type of
publication distributed electronically. Yet there is still the
original, independent fringe, who continue to publish from their heart,
or push the boundaries of what we call a 'zine'."

***

The first homes for electronic texts were the Etext Archives, founded
in 1992 by Paul Southworth, and the E-Zine-List, founded in 1993 by
John Labovitz, among others.

The first electronic texts were mostly political. They were followed by
electronic zines, that also covered cultural topics.

What exactly is a zine? John Labovitz explained on its website: "For
those of you not acquainted with the zine world, 'zine' is short for
either 'fanzine' or 'magazine', depending on your point of view. Zines
are generally produced by one person or a small group of people, done
often for fun or personal reasons, and tend to be irreverent, bizarre,
and/or esoteric. Zines are not 'mainstream' publications  -- they
generally do not contain advertisements (except, sometimes,
advertisements for other zines), are not targeted towards a mass
audience, and are generally not produced to make a profit. An 'e-zine'
is a zine that is distributed partially or solely on electronic
networks like the internet."

# The Etext Archives

The Etext Archives were founded in 1992 by Paul Southworth, and hosted
on the website of the University of Michigan. They were "home to
electronic texts of all kinds, from the sacred to the profane, and from
the political to the personal", without judging their content.

There were six sections in 1998: (a) "E-zines": electronic periodicals
from the professional to the personal; (b) "Politics": political zines,
essays, and home pages of political groups; (c) "Fiction": publications
of amateur authors; (d) "Religion": mainstream and off-beat religious
texts; (e) "Poetry": an eclectic mix of mostly amateur poetry; and (f)
"Quartz": the archive formerly hosted at quartz.rutgers.edu.

As recalled on the website the same year: "The web was just a glimmer
[in 1992], gopher was the new hot technology, and FTP was still the
standard information retrieval protocol for the vast majority of users.
The origin of the project has caused numerous people to associate it
with the University of Michigan, although in fact there has never been
an official relationship and the project is supported entirely by
volunteer labor and contributions. The equipment is wholly owned by the
project maintainers. The project was started in response to the lack of
organized archiving of political documents, periodicals and discussions
disseminated via Usenet on newsgroups such as alt.activism,
misc.activism.progressive, and alt.society.anarchy. The
alt.politics.radical-left group came later and was also a substantial
source of both materials and regular contributors. Not long thereafter,
electronic zines (e-zines) began their rapid proliferation on the
internet, and it was clear that these materials suffered from the same
lack of coordinated collection and preservation, not to mention the
fact that the lines between e-zines (which at the time were mostly
related to hacking, phreaking, and internet anarchism) and political
materials on the internet were fuzzy enough that most e-zines fit the
original mission of The Etext Archives. One thing led to another, and
e-zines of all kinds  -- many on various cultural topics unrelated to
politics  -- invaded the archives in significant volume."

# The E-Zine-List

The E-Zine-List was founded by John Labovitz in summer 1993 as a
directory of e-zines around the world, accessible via FTP, gopher,
email, the web, and other services. The list was updated monthly.

How did the E-Zine-List begin?  On the website, John explained he
originally wanted to publicize the print zine Crash by making an
electronic version of it. Looking for directories, he only found the
discussion group alt.zines and archives like The Well and The Etext
Archives. Then came the idea of an organized directory. He began with
twelve tiles listed manually in a word processor. Then he wrote his own
database.

3,045 zines were listed in November 1998. John wrote on the website:
"Now the e-zine world is different. The number of e-zines has increased
a hundredfold, crawling out of the FTP and gopher woodworks to
declaring themselves worthy of their own domain name, even asking for
financial support through advertising. Even the term 'e-zine' has been
co-opted by the commercial world, and has come to mean nearly any type
of publication distributed electronically. Yet there is still the
original, independent fringe, who continue to publish from their heart,
or push the boundaries of what we call a 'zine'."

After maintaining the list during years, John passed the torch to
others.



1993 > THE ONLINE BOOKS PAGE


[Summary]
Founded in 1993 by John Mark Ockerbloom when he was a student at
Carnegie Mellon University (CMU, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania), the Online
Books Page is "a website that facilitates access to books that are
freely readable over the internet." John Mark Ockerbloom first
maintained this page on the website of the School of Computer Science
of Carnegie Mellon University. In 1999, he moved it at the University
of Pennsylvania Library, after being hired as a digital library planner
and researcher. The Online Books Page offered links to 12,000 books in
1999, 20,000 books in 2003 (including 4,000 books published by women),
25,000 books in 2006, 30,000 books in 2008 (including 7,000 books from
Project Gutenberg) and 35,000 books in 2010.

***

In 1993, John Mark Ockerbloom created The Online Books Page as “a
website that facilitates access to books that are freely readable over
the internet.”

The web was still in its infancy, with Mosaic as its first browser.
John Mark Ockerbloom was a graduate student at the School of Computer
Science (CS) of Carnegie Mellon University (CMU, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania).

Five years later, in September 1998, John Mark wrote: "I was the
original webmaster here at CMU CS, and started our local web in 1993.
The local web included pages pointing to various locally developed
resources, and originally The Online Books Page was just one of these
pages, containing pointers to some books put online by some of the
people in our department. (Robert Stockton had made web versions of
some of Project Gutenberg's texts.) After a while, people started
asking about books at other sites, and I noticed that a number of sites
(not just Gutenberg, but also Wiretap and some other places) had books
online, and that it would be useful to have some listing of all of
them, so that you could go to one place to download or view books from
all over the net. So that's how my index got started.

I eventually gave up the webmaster job in 1996, but kept The Online
Books Page, since by then I'd gotten very interested in the great
potential the net had for making literature available to a wide
audience. At this point there are so many books going online that I
have a hard time keeping up. But I hope to keep up my online books
works in some form or another. I am very excited about the potential of
the internet as a mass communication medium in the coming years. I'd
also like to stay involved, one way or another, in making books
available to a wide audience for free via the net, whether I make this
explicitly part of my professional career, or whether I just do it as a
spare-time volunteer."

In 1998, there was an index of 7,000 books that could be browsed by
author, title or subject. There were also pointers to significant
directories and archives of online texts, and to special exhibits.

As stated on the website at the time: "Along with books, The Online
Books Page is also now listing major archives of serials (such as
magazines, published journals, and newspapers) (...). Serials can be at
least as important as books in library research. Serials are often the
first places that new research and scholarship appear. They are sources
for firsthand accounts of contemporary events and commentary. They are
also often the first (and sometimes the only) place that quality
literature appears. (For those who might still quibble about serials
being listed on a 'books page', back issues of serials are often bound
and reissued as hardbound 'books'.)"

In 1999, after graduating from Carnegie Mellon with a Ph.D. in computer
science, John Mark was hired as a digital library planner and
researcher at the University of Pennsylvania Library. He also moved The
Online Books Page there, kept it as clear and simple, and went on
expanding it.

The Online Books Page offered links to 12,000 books in 1999, 20,000
books in 2003 (including 4,000 books published by women), 25,000 books
in 2006, 30,000 books in 2008 (including 7,000 books from Project
Gutenberg) and 35,000 books in 2010. The books "have been authored,
placed online, and hosted by a wide variety of individuals and groups
throughout the world". The FAQ listed copyright information about most
countries in the world, with links to further reading.



1993 > PDF, FROM PAST TO PRESENT


[Summary]
From California, Adobe launched PDF (Portable Document Format) in June
1993, along with Acrobat Reader (free, to read PDFs) and Adobe Acrobat
(for a fee, to create PDFs). As stated on the website, PDF "lets you
capture and view robust information from any application, on any
computer system and share it with anyone around the world.” As the
"veteran" format, PDF was perfected over the years as a global standard
for distribution and viewing of information. Acrobat Reader was
available in several languages, for various platforms (Windows, Mac,
Linux, Palm OS, Pocket PC, Symbian OS, etc.), and for various devices
(computer, PDA, smartphone). In May 2003, Acrobat Reader (5th version)
merged with Acrobat eBook Reader (2nd  version) to become Adobe Reader,
starting with version 6, which could read both standard PDF files and
secure PDF files of copyrighted books.

***

From California, Adobe launched PDF (Portable Document Format) in June
1993, along with Acrobat Reader (free, to read PDFs) and Adobe Acrobat
(for a fee, to make PDFs).

As stated on the website, PDF "lets you capture and view robust
information from any application, on any computer system and share it
with anyone around the world. Individuals, businesses, and government
agencies everywhere trust and rely on Adobe PDF to communicate their
ideas and vision.”

As the "veteran" format, PDF was perfected over the years as a global
standard for distribution and viewing of information. Acrobat Reader
and Adobe Acrobat gave the tools to create and view PDF files in
several languages and for several platforms (Windows, Mac, Linux).

In August 2000, Adobe bought Glassbook, a software company intended for
publishers, booksellers, distributors and libraries. Adobe also
partnered with Amazon.com and Barnes & Noble.com to offer ebooks for
Acrobat Reader and Glassbook Reader.

# Two new software

In January 2001, Adobe launched Acrobat eBook Reader (free) and the
Adobe Content Server (for a fee).

Acrobat eBook Reader was meant to read PDF files of copyrighted books,
while adding notes and bookmarks, visualizing the book covers in a
personal library, and browsing a dictionary.

The Adobe Content Server was intended for publishers and distributors,
for the packaging, protection, distribution and sale of PDF copyrighted
books, while managing their access with DRM according to the copyright
holder’s instructions, for example allowing or not the printing and
loan of a book. The Adobe Content Server was replaced with the Adobe
LiveCycle Policy Server in November 2004.

In April 2001, Adobe partnered with Amazon, for Amazon’s eBookStore to
include 2,000 copyrighted books for Acrobat eBook Reader. These were
titles of major publishers, travel guides and children books.

Acrobat Reader was then available for PDAs, beginning with the Palm
Pilot in May 2001 and the Pocket PC in December 2001.

# Adobe Reader

From 1993 to 2003, according to Adobe’s website, over 500 million
copies of Acrobat Reader were downloaded worldwide. In 2003, Acrobat
Reader was available in many languages and for many platforms (Windows,
Mac, Linux, Palm OS, Pocket PC, Symbian OS, etc.). Approximately 10% of
the documents on the internet were available in PDF. PDF was also the
main format for ebooks.

In May 2003, Acrobat Reader (5th version) merged with Acrobat eBook
Reader (2nd  version) to become Adobe Reader, starting with version 6,
which could read both standard PDF files and secure PDF files of
copyrighted books.

In late 2003, Adobe opened its own online bookstore, the Digital Media
Store, with PDF titles from major publishers, for example
HarperCollins, Random House and Simon & Schuster, and electronic
versions of newspapers and magazines, for example The New York Times or
Popular Science. Adobe also launched Adobe eBooks Central as a service
to read, publish, sell and lend ebooks, and Adobe eBook Library as a
prototype digital library.

After being a proprietary format, PDF was officially released as an
open standard in July 2008, and published by the International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) as ISO 32000-1:2008.



1994 > THE INTERNET AS A MARKETING TOOL


[Summary]
Some publishers decided to use the web as a marketing tool to promote
their books among the 50,000 new books published per year in the U.S.
NAP (National Academy Press) was the first publisher in 1994 to post
the full text of some books on its website, for free, with the authors’
consent. It was followed by MIT Press (MIT: Massachusetts Institute of
Technology) in 1995. Oddly enough, there was no drop in sales. On the
contrary, sales increased. These initiatives were praised by a number
of other publishers, who were reluctant to do the same, for three
reasons: the cost of posting thousands of pages online, problems linked
to copyright, and what they saw as a “competition” between digital
versions for free and print versions for a fee.

***

Some publishers decided to post the full text of some books for free on
their websites, and to use the web as a marketing tool to sell the
print versions.

NAP (National Academy Press) was the first publisher in 1994 to post
the full text of some books, with the authors’ consent, as a way to
promote their books among the 50,000 new books published per year in
the U.S. NAP was followed by the MIT Press (MIT: Massachusetts
Institute of Technology) in 1995.

NAP was created by the National Academy of Sciences to publish its own
reports and the ones of the National Academy of Engineering, the
Institute of Medicine, and the National Research Council. In 1994, NAP
was publishing 200 new books a year in science, engineering and health.
The publisher began posting full books for free, as suggested by their
authors themselves, for people to browse them on the website before
buying their print versions. Oddly enough, there was no drop in sales.
On the contrary, sales increased. Print books ordered online were 20%
cheaper. There were also more sales by phone. In 1998, the NAP Reading
Room offered 1,000 entire books, available online for free in "image"
format, HTML and PDF.

In 1995, MIT Press was publishing 200 new books per year and 40
journals, in science and technology, architecture, social theory,
economics, cognitive science, and computational science. MIT Press also
decided to put a number of books online for free, as "a long-term
commitment to the efficient and creative use of new technologies".
Sales of print books with a free online version increased as well.

These initiatives were praised by a number of other publishers, who
were reluctant to do the same, for three reasons: the cost of posting
thousands of pages online, problems linked to copyright, and what they
saw as a “competition” between digital versions for free and print
versions for a fee.



1995 > THE PRINT PRESS WENT ONLINE


[Summary]
The print press going online in the 1990s led the way to print books
going online a few years later, thus the need for this chapter. The
first electronic versions of print newspapers were available in the
early 1990s through commercial services like America Online and
CompuServe. In 1995, major newspapers like The New York Times, The
Washington Post or The Wall Street Journal began offering websites with
a partial or full version of their latest issue, as well as online
archives. In the United Kingdom, the daily Times and the Sunday Times
set up a common website called Times Online, with a way to create a
personalized edition. The weekly publication The Economist went online
too, as well as the daily Le Monde and Libération in France, the daily
El País in Spain, and the weekly Focus and Der Spiegel in Germany.

***

The print press going online in the 1990s led the way to print books
going online a few years later, thus the need for this chapter.

The first electronic versions of print newspapers were available in the
early 1990s through commercial services like America Online and
CompuServe.

In 1995, newspapers began offering websites with a partial or full
version of their latest issue, available freely or through subscription
(free or paid), as well as online archives.

For example, The New York Times site could be accessed free of charge,
with articles of the print daily, breaking news updated every ten
minutes, and original reporting only available online. The site of The
Washington Post gave the daily news online, with a full database of
articles, with images, sound and videos. The site of The Wall Street
Journal was available with a paid subscription, with 100,000
subscribers in 1998.

In the United Kingdom, the daily Times and the Sunday Times set up a
common website called Times Online, with a way to create a personalized
edition. The weekly publication The Economist went online too, as well
as the daily Le Monde and Libération in France, the daily El País in
Spain, and the weekly Focus and Der Spiegel in Germany.

"More than 3,600 newspapers now publish on the internet", Eric K. Meyer
stated in an essay published in late 1997 on the website of
AJR/NewsLink. "A full 43% of all online newspapers now are based
outside the United States. A year ago, only 29% of online newspapers
were located abroad. Rapid growth, primarily in Canada, the United
Kingdom, Norway, Brazil and Germany, has pushed the total number of
non-U.S. online newspapers to 1,563. The number of U.S. newspapers
online also has grown markedly, from 745 a year ago to 1,290 six months
ago to 2,059 today. Outside the United States, the United Kingdom, with
294 online newspapers, and Canada, with 230, lead the way. In Canada,
every province or territory now has at least one online newspaper.
Ontario leads the way with 91, Alberta has 44, and British Columbia has
43. Elsewhere in North America, Mexico has 51 online newspapers, 23
newspapers are online in Central America and 36 are online in the
Caribbean. Europe is the next most wired continent for newspapers, with
728 online newspaper sites. After the United Kingdom, Norway has the
next most  -- 53  -- and Germany has 43. Asia (led by India) has 223
online newspapers, South America (led by Bolivia) has 161 and Africa
(led by South Africa) has 53. Australia and other islands have 64
online newspapers."

The online versions of newspapers brought a wealth of information. The
web provided readers not only with news available online, but also with
a whole encyclopedia to help understand them. The reader could click on
hyperlinks to get maps, biographies, official texts, political and
economic data, photographs, as well as the first attempts in audio and
video coverage. The reader could also easily access other articles on
the same topic, with search engines sorting out articles by date,
author, title or subject.



1995 > AMAZON, A PIONEER IN CYBERCOMMERCE


[Summary]
Jeff Bezos launched Amazon.com in July 1995 in Seattle, on the West
Coast, after a market study which led him to conclude that books were
the best products to sell on the internet. The online bookstore started
with 10 employees and a catalog of 3 million books. Unlike traditional
bookstores, Amazon's windows were its webpages, with transactions made
through the internet. Books were stored in huge storage facilities
before being put into boxes and sent by mail. In November 2000, Amazon
had 7,500 employees, a catalog of 28 million items, 23 million clients
worldwide and four subsidiaries in United Kingdom (launched in August
1998), Germany (August 1998), France (August 2000), and Japan (November
2000). A fifth subsidiary opened in Canada in June 2002. A sixth
subsidiary, named Joyo, opened in China in September 2004. In July
2005, for its 10th anniversary, Amazon had 41 million clients and 9,000
employees.

***

Jeff Bezos launched Amazon.com in July 1995 in Seattle, on the West
Coast, after a market study which led him to conclude that books were
the best products to sell on the internet.

The online bookstore started with 10 employees and a catalog of 3
million books, i.e. the catalog of books available for sale in the U.S.
Unlike traditional bookstores, Amazon’s windows were its webpages, with
transactions made through the internet. Books were stored in huge
storage facilities before being put into boxes and sent by mail.

What exactly was the idea behind Amazon.com? In spring 1994, Jeff Bezos
drew up a list of twenty products that could be sold online, ranging
from clothing to gardening tools, and then researched the top five,
which were CDs, videos, computer hardware, computer software and books.

As recalled by Jeff Bezos in 1997 in Amazon's press kit: "I used a
whole bunch of criteria to evaluate the potential of each product, but
among the main criteria was the size of the relative markets. Books, I
found out, were an $82 billion market worldwide. The price point was
another major criterion: I wanted a low-priced product. I reasoned that
since this was the first purchase many people would make online, it had
to be non-threatening in size. A third criterion was the range of
choice: there were 3 million items in the book category and only a
tenth of that in CDs, for example. This was important because the wider
the choice, the more the organizing and selection capabilities of the
computer could be put in good use."

In the wake of the Internet Bookstore in United Kingdom, that was the
largest online bookstore in Europe, Amazon.com launched is own
Associates Program in spring 1997. There were 30,000 associates in
spring 1998, and 60,000 associates in June 1998.

As stated in a press release dated 8 June 1998 to promote the program:
"The Amazon.com Associates Program allows website owners to easily
participate in hassle-free electronic commerce by recommending books on
their site and referring visitors to Amazon.com. In return,
participants earn referral fees of up to 15 percent of the sales they
generate. Amazon.com handles the secure online ordering, customer
service, and shipping and sends weekly email sales reports. Enrollment
in the program is free, and participants can be up and running the same
day. Associates range from large and small businesses to nonprofits,
authors, publishers, personal home pages, and more. The popularity of
the program is reflected in the range of additions to the Associates
Community in the past few months: Adobe, InfoBeat, Kemper Funds, PR
Newswire, Travelocity, Virtual Vineyards, and Xoom."

People could search Amazon’s online catalog by author, title, subject,
date or ISBN. The website offered excerpts from books, book reviews,
customer reviews, and author interviews. People could "leaf" through
extracts and reviews, order some books online, and pay with their
credit card. Books arrived within a week at their doorstep. As an
online retailer, Amazon could offer lower prices than local bookstores,
a larger selection, and a wealth of product information. Customers
could subscribe to a mailing list to get reviews of new books by their
favorite authors, or new books in their favorite topics, with 44 topics
to choose from. In 1998, Amazon was also selling CDs, DVDs, audio books
and computer games, with 3 million clients in 160 countries.

Amazon’s main competitor was the online bookstore of Barnes & Noble, a
major bookseller with 481 stores nationwide in 1997, in 48 states out
of 50, as well as 520 B. Dalton stores in shopping malls. Barnes &
Noble first launched its America OnLine (AOL) website in March 1997, as
the exclusive bookseller for the 12 million AOL customers, before
launching its own website barnesandnoble.com in May 1997 in partnership
with Bertelsmann (Barnes & Noble bought Bertelsmann’s portion (36,8%)
back for 164 million dollars in July 2003).

Barnes & Noble’s site offered significant discounts: 30% off all in-
stock hardcovers, 20% off all in-stock paperbacks, 40% off select
titles, and up to 90% off bargain books. Its Affiliate Network spread
quickly, with 12,000 affiliate websites in May 1998, including CNN
Interactive, Lycos and ZDNet. One year later, Barnes & Noble.com
launched a revamped website with a better design, an Express Lane one-
click ordering, improved book search capabilities, and  a new software
"superstore".  A fierce price war began with Amazon for the best book
discounts, and Amazon.com came to be known as Amazon.toast, which
didn’t last. With a two-year head start, Amazon stayed ahead in the
competition.

Amazon launched its eBookStore in November 2000, three months after
Barnes & Noble, after partnering in August 2000 with Microsoft to sell
ebooks for the Microsoft Reader, and with Adobe to offer ebooks for the
Acrobat Reader and the Glassbook Reader  -- Adobe had just bought
Glassbook, its reader and its digital bookstore. In April 2001,
Amazon.com partnered again with Adobe to include 2,000 copyrighted
books for the Acrobat eBook Reader, mainly titles from major
publishers, travel guides and children books.

In November 2000, Amazon had 7,500 employees, a catalog of 28 million
items, 23 million clients worldwide and four subsidiaries in United
Kingdom (launched in August 1998), Germany (August 1998), France
(August 2000) and Japan (November 2000). A fifth subsidiary opened in
Canada in June 2002, and a sixth subsidiary, named Joyo, opened in
China in September 2004. In July 2005, for its 10th anniversary, Amazon
had 9,000 employees and 41 million clients.



1996 > THE INTERNET ARCHIVE, FOR FUTURE GENERATIONS


[Summary]
Founded in April 1996 by Brewster Kahle in San Francisco, California,
the Internet Archive wanted to offer a permanent access of the web
“through the ages” to present and future generations. In October 2001,
with 30 billion stored webpages, the Internet Archive launched the
Wayback Machine, for internet users throughout the world to be able to
surf the archive of a given website by date. In 2004, there were 300
terabytes of data, with a growth of 12 terabytes per month. There were
65 billion webpages (from 50 million websites) in 2006, 85 billion
webpages in 2008, and 150 billion webpages in March 2010. The Internet
Archive has also defined itself as "a nonprofit digital library
dedicated to providing universal access to human knowledge", building
up an online library of text, audio, software, image and video content.
In October 2005, it launched the Open Content Alliance (OCA) with a
number of partner organizations to build a universal digital library of
multilingual digitized text and multimedia content.

***

Founded in April 1996 by Brewster Kahle, the Internet Archive wanted to
offer permanent access of the web “through the ages” to present and
future generations.

As explained on the website at the time, throughout history, societies
have sought to preserve their culture and heritage for present and
future generations, and libraries have been created to preserve the
paper trail of that culture and legacy, and to facilitate its access to
the general public and researchers. Therefore it seems essential to
extend their mission to new technology. Paradoxically this was done
poorly in the early 20th century. Many movies were recycled -- and thus
lost forever -- to retrieve the silver layer. Many radio or TV programs
were not saved. It is important not to repeat the same mistakes for the
internet, especially for the web, a new medium the extent of which is
still unknown in 1996. This is the raison d’être of the Internet
Archive, that has defined itself as "a nonprofit digital library
dedicated to providing universal access to human knowledge."

The whole web was stored every two months or so on the servers of the
Internet Archive in San Francisco, California, for researchers,
historians and scholars to be able to access it.

In October 2001, with 30 billion stored webpages, the Internet Archive
launched the Wayback Machine, for internet users throughout the world
to be able to surf the archive of a given website by date.

In 2004, there were 300 terabytes of data, with a growth of 12
terabytes per month. There were 65 billion pages (from 50 million
websites) in 2006, 85 billion pages in 2008, and 150 billion pages in
March 2010.

In late 1999, the Internet Archive also became an online library of
text, audio, software, image and video content, for example some books
of the Million Book Project (10,520 books in April 2005), films for the
period 1903-1973, live concerts, software, sites about September 11,
sites about elections, and sites about the web pioneers, with all
collections freely available on the web.

As a side remark, the Million Book Project, also called the Universal
Library or Universal Digital Library (UDL), was launched in January
2000 by the Carnegie Mellon University (Pennsylvania) with the aim to
digitize one million books in a number of languages, including in
libraries from India and China. The project was completed in 2007, with
one million books available on the university website, as image files
in DjVu and TIFF formats, and three mirror sites (India, Northern
China, Southern China).

In October 2005, the Internet Archive launched the Open Content
Alliance (OCA) as a group of cultural, technology, non profit, and
governmental organizations, with the aim to build a world public
permanent archive of multilingual digitized text and multimedia
content. The OCA started to digitize public domain books around the
world, and to include them in the collection of the Internet Archive.



1996 > LIBRARIES LAUNCHED WEBSITES


[Summary]
The Helsinki City Library in Finland was the first library to launch a
website, which went live in February 1994. Two years later, more and
more libraries started their own websites as a virtual window for their
patrons and beyond. Patrons could check opening hours, browse the
online catalog, and surf a broad selection of websites on various
topics. Libraries developed digital libraries alongside their standard
collections, so that anyone could access their specialized, old, local
and regional collections, including for images and sound. Librarians
could finally fulfill two goals that used to be in contradiction:
preservation (on shelves) and communication (on the internet). Debates
were fierce about the assets of the print book versus the digital book,
and vice versa.

***

In the mid-1990s, libraries started their own websites as a virtual
window for their patrons and beyond, with an online catalog and a
digital library.

In his book “Books in My Life”, published by the Library of Congress in
1985, Robert Downs, a librarian, wrote: "My lifelong love affair with
books and reading continues unaffected by automation, computers, and
all other forms of the twentieth-century gadgetry."

Automation and computers were followed by the internet (1974) and the
web (1990), and eased the work of librarians in some way.

The Helsinki City Library in Finland was the first library to launch a
website, which went live in February 1994. Other libraries started
their own websites as a virtual window for their patrons and beyond.
Patrons could check opening hours, browse the online catalog, and surf
on a broad selection of websites on various topics.

Libraries also developed digital libraries alongside their standard
collections, so that anyone could access their specialized, old, local
and regional collections, including for images and sound. Librarians
could finally fulfill two goals that used to be in contradiction:
preservation (on shelves) and communication (on the internet). People
could now leaf through digital facsimiles, and access the original
books only if necessary.

# At the British Library

In “Information Systems Strategy”, a document posted on the British
Library’s website in 1997, Brian Lang, chief executive of the library,
stated: "We do not envisage an exclusively digital library. We are
aware that some people feel that digital materials will predominate in
libraries of the future. Others anticipate that the impact will be
slight. In the context of the British Library, printed books,
manuscripts, maps, music, sound recordings and all the other existing
materials in the collection will always retain their central
importance, and we are committed to continuing to provide, and to
improve, access to these in our reading rooms. The importance of
digital materials will, however, increase. We recognize that network
infrastructure is at present most strongly developed in the higher
education sector, but there are signs that similar facilities will also
be available elsewhere, particularly in the industrial and commercial
sector, and for public libraries. Our vision of network access
encompasses all these."

An extensive Digital Library Program was expected to begin in 1999. As
explained by Brian Lang: "The development of the Digital Library will
enable the British Library to embrace the digital information age.
Digital technology will be used to preserve and extend the Library's
unparalleled collection. Access to the collection will become boundless
with users from all over the world, at any time, having simple, fast
access to digitized materials using computer networks, particularly the
internet."

# Print book vs. digital book

Debates were fierce about the assets of the print book versus the
digital book, and vice versa.

Roberto Hernández Montoya, an editor of Venezuela Analítica, an
electronic magazine offering a small digital library, wrote in
September 1998: "The printed text can't be replaced, at least not for
the foreseeable future. The paper book is a tremendous 'machine'. We
can't leaf through an electronic book in the same way as a paper book.
On the other hand, electronic use allows us to locate text chains more
quickly. In a certain way we can more intensively read the electronic
text, even with the inconvenience of reading on the screen. The
electronic book is less expensive and can be more easily distributed
worldwide (if we don't count the cost of the computer and the internet
connection)."

In the February 1996 issue of the Swiss computer magazine
"Informatique-Informations", Pierre Perroud, founder of the digital
library Athena, explained that "electronic texts represent an
encouragement to reading and a convivial participation to culture
dissemination", particularly for textual research and text study. These
texts are "a good complement to the print book, which remains
irreplaceable when for 'true' reading. (...) The book remains a
mysteriously holy companion with profound symbolism for us: we grip it
in our hands, we hold it against us, we look at it with admiration; its
small size comforts us and its content impresses us; its fragility
contains a density we are fascinated by; like man it fears water and
fire, but it has the power to shelter man's thoughts from time."



1996 > TOWARDS A DIGITAL KNOWLEDGE


[Summary]
The information available in books stays “static”, whereas the
information available on the internet is regularly updated, thus the
need to change our relationship to knowledge. In 1996, more and more
computers connected to the internet were available in schools and at
home. Teachers began exploring new ways of teaching. Going from print
culture to digital culture was changing the way both teachers and
students were seeing teaching and learning. Print culture provided
“stable” information whereas digital culture provided "moving"
information, with information being regularly updated. During a
conference organized by the International Federation of Information
Processing (IFIP) in September 1996, Dale Spender, a professor and
researcher, gave a lecture on "Creativity and the Computer Education
Industry", with insightful comments on forthcoming trends.

***

The information available in books stays “static”, whereas the
information available on the internet is regularly updated, thus the
need to change our relationship to knowledge.

In 1996, more and more computers connected to the internet were
available in schools and at home. Teachers began exploring new ways of
teaching. Going from print culture to digital culture was changing the
way both teachers and students were seeing teaching and learning. Print
culture provided “stable” information whereas digital culture provided
"moving" information.

During a conference organized by the International Federation of
Information Processing (IFIP) in September 1996, Dale Spender, a
professor and researcher, gave a lecture on "Creativity and the
Computer Education Industry", with insightful comments on forthcoming
trends. Here are some excerpts:

"Throughout print culture, information has been contained in books  --
and this has helped to shape our notion of information. For the
information in books stays the same  -- it endures. And this has
encouraged us to think of information as stable  -- as a body of
knowledge which can be acquired, taught, passed on, memorized, and
tested of course. The very nature of print itself has fostered a sense
of truth; truth too is something which stays the same, which endures.
And there is no doubt that this stability, this orderliness, has been a
major contributor to the huge successes of the industrial age and the
scientific revolution. (...)

But the digital revolution changes all this. Suddenly it is not the
oldest information  -- the longest lasting information that is the most
reliable and useful. It is the very latest information that we now put
the most faith in  -- and which we will pay the most for. (...)

Education will be about participating in the production of the latest
information. This is why education will have to be ongoing throughout
life and work. Every day there will be something new that we will all
have to learn. To keep up. To be in the know. To do our jobs. To be
members of the digital community. And far from teaching a body of
knowledge that will last for life, the new generation of information
professionals will be required to search out, add to, critique, 'play
with', and daily update information, and to make available the constant
changes that are occurring."

Robert Beard, a professor at Bucknell University, in Lewisburg,
Pennsylvania, wrote in September 1998: "As a language teacher, the web
represents a plethora of new resources produced by the target culture,
new tools for delivering lessons (interactive Java and Shockwave
exercises) and testing, which are available to students any time they
have the time or interest  -- 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. It is also
an almost limitless publication outlet for my colleagues and I, not to
mention my institution. (...) Ultimately all course materials,
including lecture notes, exercises, moot and credit testing, grading,
and interactive exercises will be far more effective in conveying
concepts that we have not even dreamed of yet.”

Russon Wooldridge, a professor at the Department of French Studies,
University of Toronto, Canada, wrote in February 2001: " My research,
conducted once in an ivory tower, is now almost exclusively done
through local or remote collaborations. (…) All my teaching makes the
most of internet resources (web and email): the two common places for a
course are the classroom and the website of the course, where I put all
course materials. I have published all my research data of the last 20
years on the web (re-edition of books, articles, texts of old
dictionaries as interactive databases, treaties from the 16th century,
etc.). I publish proceedings of symposiums, I publish a journal, I
collaborate with French colleagues by publishing online in Toronto what
they can't publish online at home. In May 2000, I organized an
international symposium in Toronto about French studies enhanced by new
technologies. (...) I realize that without the internet I wouldn't have
as many activities, or at least they would be very different from the
ones I have today. So I don't see the future without them."

The Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) officially launched its
OpenCourseWare (OCW) in September 2003 to put its course materials for
free on the web, as a way to promote open dissemination of knowledge.
In September 2002, a pilot version was available online with 32 course
materials. 500 course materials were available in March 2004, 1,400
course materials in May 2006, and all 1,800 course materials in
November 2007, regularly updated then, with some of them translated
into Spanish, Portuguese and Chinese with the help of other
organizations. MIT also launched the OpenCourseWare Consortium (OCW
Consortium) in November 2005, as a common project for educational
institutions that were willing to offer free online course materials,
with the course materials of 100 universities worldwide one year later.



1996 > THE @FOLIO PROJECT, A MOBILE DEVICE FOR TEXTS


[Summary]
The @folio project is a mobile device for texts designed as early as
October 1996 by Pierre Schweitzer, an architect-designer living in
Strasbourg, France. It is meant to download and read any text and/or
illustrations from the web or hard disk, in any format, with no
proprietary format and no DRM. The technology of @folio was novel and
simple. It is inspired from fax and tab file folders. The flash memory
is "printed" like Gutenberg printed his books. The facsimile mode is
readable as is for any content, from sheet music to mathematical or
chemical formulas, with no conversion necessary, whether it is
handwritten text, calligraphy, free hand drawing or non-alphabetical
writing. An international patent was filed in April 2001. The French
start-up iCodex was created in July 2002 to develop and promote the
@folio project.

***

The @folio project is a mobile device for texts designed as early as
October 1996 by Pierre Schweitzer, an architect-designer living in
Strasbourg, France.

It is meant to download and read any text and/or illustrations from the
web or hard disk, in any format, with no proprietary format and no DRM.

The technology of @folio was novel and simple. It is inspired from fax
and tab file folders. The flash memory is "printed" like Gutenberg
printed his books. The facsimile mode is readable as is for any
content, from sheet music to mathematical or chemical formulas, with no
conversion necessary, whether it is handwritten text, calligraphy, free
hand drawing or non-alphabetical writing. All this is difficult if not
impossible on a computer or ebook reader (in the late 1990s and early
2000s).

The screen of the lightweight prototype takes 80% of the total surface
and has low power consumption. It is surrounded by a translucent and
flexible frame that folds to protect the screen when not in use. @folio
could be sold for US $100 for the basic standard version, with various
combinations of screen sizes and flash memory to fit different needs.

Intuitive navigation allows to "turn" pages as easily as in a print
book, and allows to sort out and search documents as easily as with a
tab file folder, and choose one’s own preferences for margins,
paragraphs, font selection and character size. There are no buttons,
only a round trackball adorned with the world map in black and white.
The trackball can be replaced with a long and narrow tactile pad on
either side of the frame.

The flash memory allows the downloading of thousands of hypertext
pages, either previously linked before download or linked during the
download. @folio provides an instant automatic reformatting of
documents, for them to fit the size of the screen. For "text" files, no
software is necessary. For "image" files, Pierre conceived a
reformatting software called Mot@Mot (Word@Word in French) which could
be used on any other device. This software received much attention from
the French National Library (BNF: Bibliothèque Nationale de France),
especially for its old books (published before 1812) and illustrated
manuscripts.

An international patent was filed in April 2001. The French startup
iCodex was created in July 2002 to develop and promote the @folio
project.

To this day, @folio has stayed a prototype, because of lack of funding
and because of the language barrier, with only two articles in English
in 2007  -- one in Project Gutenberg News and one in TeleRead about
Pierre Schweitzer’s dream  -- for dozens of articles in French.

Even the best researchers can’t do much with no support, no funding,
and no interpreter (from French to English) to help them get through
the language barrier.



1997 > MULTIMEDIA CONVERGENCE


[Summary]
Previously distinct information-based industries, such as printing,
publishing, graphic design, media, sound recording and film making,
were converging into one industry, with information as a common
product. This trend was named "multimedia convergence", with a massive
loss of jobs, and a serious enough issue to be tackled by the ILO
(International Labor Organization). The first ILO Symposium on
Multimedia Convergence was held in January 1997 at the ILO headquarters
in Geneva, Switzerland, with employers, unionists and government
representatives from all over the world. Some participants, mostly
employers, demonstrated that the information society was generating or
would generate jobs. Other participants, mostly unionists, demonstrated
there was a rise in unemployment worldwide, that should be addressed
right away through investment, innovation, vocational training,
computer literacy, retraining and fair labor rights, including for
teleworkers.

***

Previously distinct information-based industries, such as printing,
publishing, graphic design, media, sound recording and film making,
were converging into one industry, with information as a common
product.

This trend was named multimedia convergence, with a massive loss of
jobs, and a serious enough issue to be tackled by the International
Labor Organization (ILO).

# A symposium

The first ILO Symposium on Multimedia Convergence was held in January
1997 at the ILO headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland. Employers,
unionists and government representatives from all over the world came
to discuss the Information Society, the impact of the convergence
process on employment and work, and labor relations in the information
age. The purpose of these debates was "to stimulate reflection on the
policies and approaches most apt to prepare our societies and
especially our workforces for the turbulent transition towards an
information economy."

As stated in the introduction to the symposium’s proceedings: "Today
all forms of information  -- whether based in text, sound or images  --
can be converted into bits and bytes for handling by computer.
Digitalization has made it possible to create, record, manipulate,
combine, store, retrieve and transmit information and information-based
products in ways which magnetic tape, celluloid and paper did not
permit. Digitalization thus allows music, cinema and the written word
to be recorded and transformed through similar processes and without
distinct material supports. Previously dissimilar industries, such as
publishing and sound recording, now both produce CD-ROMs rather than
simply books and records."

Multimedia convergence was “creating new configurations among an ever-
widening range of industries. The digitalization of information
processing and delivery is transforming the way financial systems
operate, the way enterprises exchange information internally and
externally, and the way individuals work in an increasingly electronic
environment."

In the book industry, traditional printing was first disrupted by new
photocomposition machines, with lower costs. Text and image processing
began to be handed over to desktop publishing and graphic art studios.
Impression costs went on decreasing with photocopiers, color
photocopiers and digital printing. Digitization speeded up the
editorial process, which used to be sequential, by allowing the copy
editor, the image editor and the layout staff to work at the same time
on the same book.

In the press industry, journalists and editors could now type in their
articles online. These articles went directly from text to layout,
without being keyed in anymore by the production staff.

# Some contributions

One of the participants of the symposium, Peter Leisink, an associate
professor of labor studies at the Utrecht University, Netherlands,
explained: "A survey of the United Kingdom book publishing industry
showed that proofreaders and editors have been externalized and now
work as home-based teleworkers. The vast majority of them had entered
self-employment, not as a first-choice option, but as a result of
industry mergers, relocations and redundancies. These people should
actually be regarded as casualized workers, rather than as self-
employed, since they have little autonomy and tend to depend on only
one publishing house for their work."

Another participant, Michel Muller, secretary-general of the French
Federation of Book, Paper and Communication Industry (FILPAC:
Fédération des Industries du Livre, du Papier et de la Communication),
stated that, in France, jobs in this industry fell from 110,000 to
90,000 in ten years, from 1987 to 1996, with expensive social plans to
re-train and re-employ the 20,000 people who lost their jobs.

He explained that, "if the technological developments really created
new jobs, as had been suggested, then it might have been better to
invest the money in reliable studies about what jobs were being created
and which ones were being lost, rather than in social plans which often
created artificial jobs. These studies should highlight the new skills
and qualifications in demand as the technological convergence process
broke down the barriers between the printing industry, journalism and
other vehicles of information. Another problem caused by convergence
was the trend towards ownership concentration. A few big groups
controlled not only the bulk of the print media, but a wide range of
other media, and thus posed a threat to pluralism in expression.
Various tax advantages enjoyed by the press today should be re-examined
and adapted to the new realities facing the press and multimedia
enterprises. Managing all the social and societal issues raised by new
technologies required widespread agreement and consensus. Collective
agreements were vital, since neither individual negotiations nor the
market alone could sufficiently settle these matters."

A third participant, Walter Durling, director of AT&T Global
Information Solutions in the United States, had quite theoretical words
about the matter: "Technology would not change the core of human
relations. More sophisticated means of communicating, new mechanisms
for negotiating, and new types of conflicts would all arise, but the
relationships between workers and employers themselves would continue
to be the same. When film was invented, people had been afraid that it
could bring theatre to an end. That has not happened. When television
was developed, people had feared that it would do away cinemas, but it
had not. One should not be afraid of the future. Fear of the future
should not lead us to stifle creativity with regulations. Creativity
was needed to generate new employment. The spirit of enterprise had to
be reinforced with the new technology in order to create jobs for those
who had been displaced. Problems should not be anticipated, but tackled
when they arose." In short, humanity shouldn't fear technology.

# Job creation vs. lay-off

In fact, employees were not so much afraid of technology as they were
afraid of losing their jobs. In 1996, unemployment was already
significant in any field, which was not the case when film and
television were invented.

What would be the balance between job creation and lay-off in the near
future? Unions were struggling worldwide to promote the creation of
jobs through investment, innovation, vocational training, computer
literacy, retraining for new jobs in digital technology, fair
conditions for labor contracts and collective agreements, defense of
copyright for the re-use of articles from the print media to the web,
protection of workers in the artistic field, and defense of teleworkers
as workers having full rights.

Despite unions' efforts, would the situation become as tragic as
suggested in a note of the symposium's proceedings? "Some fear a future
in which individuals will be forced to struggle for survival in an
electronic jungle. And the survival mechanisms which have been
developed in recent decades, such as relatively stable employment
relations, collective agreements, employee representation, employer-
provided job training, and jointly funded social security schemes, may
be sorely tested in a world where work crosses borders at the speed of
light."



1997 > A PORTAL FOR EUROPEAN NATIONAL LIBRARIES


[Summary]
Gabriel  -- an acronym for "Gateway and Bridge to Europe's National
Libraries"  -- was launched as a common portal giving access to the
internet services of participating libraries. The Gabriel project was
conceived during the 1994 CENL (Conference of European National
Librarians) meeting in Oslo, Norway, as an common electronic board with
updates about ongoing internet projects. Another meeting took place in
March 1995 with representatives from the national libraries in the
Netherlands, United Kingdom and Finland, who launched a pilot project
and were joined then by the national libraries in Germany, France and
Poland. A first Gabriel website was launched in September 1995. During
the 1996 CENL meeting in Lisbon, Portugal, Gabriel became an official
CENL website, with a new trilingual (English, French, German) portal
launched in January 1997.

***

Gabriel -- an acronym for "Gateway and Bridge to Europe's National
Libraries -- was launched in January 1997 as a common portal giving
access to the internet services of the participating libraries.

As stated on its website: "Gabriel also recalls Gabriel Naudé, whose
'Advis pour dresser une bibliothèque' (Paris, 1627) is one of the
earliest theoretical works about libraries in any European language and
provides a blueprint for the great modern research library. The name
Gabriel is common to many European languages and is derived from the
Old Testament, where Gabriel appears as one of the archangels or
heavenly messengers. He also appears in a similar role in the New
Testament and the Qu'ran."

In 1998, Gabriel offered links to the internet services of 38
participating national libraries (Albania, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Macedonia, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Russia, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom, Vatican City). These links
led to OPACs (Open Public Access Catalogs), national bibliographies,
national union catalogs, indexes for periodicals, web servers and
gophers, with a section for common European projects.

How did Gabriel begin? During the 1994 CENL annual meeting in Oslo,
Norway, it was suggested that national libraries should set up a common
electronic board with updates about their ongoing internet projects.

Representatives from the national libraries in the Netherlands
(Koninklijke Bibliotheek), United Kingdom (British Library) and Finland
(Helsinki University Library) met in March 1995 in The Hague,
Netherlands, to launch the pilot Gabriel project. They were joined then
by the national libraries in Germany (Deutsche Bibliothek), France
(Bibliothèque Nationale de France) and Poland (Biblioteka Narodowa).
Gabriel would describe their services and collections, while seeking to
attract other national libraries into the project.

The original Gabriel website was launched in September 1995. It was
maintained by the British Library Network Services and mirrored on the
servers of the national libraries in the Netherlands and Finland. In
November 1995, other national libraries were invited to submit entries
describing their  services and collections, after they launched their
own websites and online catalogs. The number of participating libraries
expanded.

During the 1996 CENL annual meeting in Lisbon, Portugal, it was decided
that Gabriel would become an official CENL website in January 1997.

The new trilingual (English, French, German) Gabriel portal was
maintained by the national library in the Netherlands (Koninklijke
Bibliotheek), and mirrored on the servers of four other national
libraries, in United Kingdom, Finland, Germany and Slovenia.

What about public libraries? According to “Internet and the Library
Sphere”, a document available on the website of the European
Commission, 1,000 public libraries from 26 European countries had their
own websites in December 1998. The websites ranged from one webpage
with a postal address and opening hours to a full website with access
to the library's OPAC.

The leading countries were Finland (247 libraries), Sweden (132
libraries), United Kingdom (112 libraries), Denmark (107 libraries),
Germany (102 libraries), Netherlands (72 libraries), Lithuania (51
libraries), Spain (56 libraries) and Norway (45 libraries). Russia had
a common website for 26 public reference libraries. Newcomers were the
Czech Republic (29 libraries) and Portugal (3 libraries).

As for Gabriel’s fate, the portal merged in summer 2005 with the
European Library's website (created by CENL in January 2004) to offer a
common portal for the 43 European national libraries. Europeana, the
European digital library, was launched three years later, in November
2008, with two million documents. Europeana offered 6 million documents
in March 2010, and 10 million documents on a revamped website in
September 2010.



1997 > E INK, AN ELECTRONIC INK TECHNOLOGY


[Summary]
In April 1997, researchers at the MIT Media Lab (MIT: Massachusetts
Institute of Technology) founded the company E Ink to develop an
electronic ink technology. Very briefly (and not so well) explained,
the technology was the following one: caught between two sheets of
flexible plastic, millions of micro-capsules, each of them containing
black and white particles, are in suspension in a clear fluid. A
positive or negative electric field indicates the desired group of
particles on the surface, to view, modify or delete data. The first
screen using this technology was available as a prototype in July 2002,
and marketed in 2004. Other screens followed for various ebook readers
(Librié, Sony Reader, Cybook, Kindle, Nook, etc.), as well as
prototypes of flexible displays announcing the forthcoming electronic
paper.

***

In April 1997, researchers at the MIT Media Lab (MIT: Massachusetts
Institute of Technology) founded the company E Ink to develop an
electronic ink technology.

The first screen using this technology was available as a prototype in
July 2002, and marketed in 2004. Other screens followed for various
ebook readers (Librié, Sony Reader, Cybook, Kindle, Nook, etc.), as
well as prototypes of flexible displays announcing the forthcoming
electronic paper.

As explained on the company's website: "Electronic ink is a proprietary
material that is processed into a film for integration into electronic
displays. Although revolutionary in concept, electronic ink is a
straightforward fusion of chemistry, physics and electronics to create
this new material. The principal components of electronic ink are
millions of tiny microcapsules, about the diameter of a human hair. In
one incarnation, each microcapsule contains positively charged white
particles and negatively charged black particles suspended in a clear
fluid. When a negative electric field is applied, the white particles
move to the top of the microcapsule where they become visible to the
user. This makes the surface appear white at that spot. At the same
time, an opposite electric field pulls the black particles to the
bottom of the microcapsules where they are hidden. By reversing this
process, the black particles appear at the top of the capsule, which
now makes the surface appear dark at that spot. To form an E Ink
electronic display, the ink is printed onto a sheet of plastic film
that is laminated to a layer of circuitry. The circuitry forms a
pattern of pixels that can then be controlled by a display driver.
These microcapsules are suspended in a liquid 'carrier medium' allowing
them to be printed using existing screen printing processes onto
virtually any surface, including glass, plastic, fabric and even paper.
Ultimately electronic ink will permit most any surface to become a
display, bringing information out of the confines of traditional
devices and into the world around us."

LCD screens of ebook readers were replaced by E Ink screens. Launched
in April 2004 by Sony in Japan, the Librié was the first ebook reader
with a 6-inch E Ink screen. Launched in October 2006 in the U.S., the
Sony Reader had a E Ink screen that gave “an excellent reading
experience very close to that of real paper, making it very easy going
on the eyes" (Mike Cook, editor of epubBooks.com). The Sony Reader was
then available in Canada, United Kingdom, Germany and France, with
various models. The Cybook Gen3 launched by Bookeen in July 2007, the
Kindle launched by Amazon in November 2007, and the Nook launched by
Barnes & Noble in November 2009 also had E Ink screens.

Another display technology was the gyricon, developed since 1997 by
PARC (Palo Alto Research Center), the Xerox center in Silicon Valley,
California. In December 2000, some researchers at PARC founded the
company Gyricon Media to market the SmartPaper, an electronic paper
based on the gyricon technology. Very briefly (and not so well)
explained, the technology was the following one: in between two sheets
of flexible plastic, millions of micro-cells contain two-tone (black
and white) beads suspended in a clear liquid. Each bead has an electric
charge. An external electrical pulse makes the balls rotate and change
color, to display, modify, or delete data. In 2004, Gyricon Media began
marketing commercial advertising, for example small posters running on
batteries. The company ended its activities in 2005, with R&D
activities going on at Xerox.

Another project has been developed by the company Plastic Logic, this
time using both proprietary plastic electronics and the E Ink
Technology. As explained on the company’s website in 2009: "Technology
for plastic electronics on thin and flexible plastic substrates was
developed at Cambridge University’s renowned Cavendish Laboratory in
the 1990s. In 2000, Plastic Logic was spun out of Cavendish Laboratory
to develop a broad range of products using the plastic electronics
technology."



1997 > THE ELECTRONIC BEOWULF PROJECT


[Summary]
Some digitized versions of treasures from the British Library were
freely available online in the late 1990s. One of the first digitized
treasures was Beowulf, the earliest known narrative poem in English,
and one of the most famous works of Anglo-Saxon poetry. The British
Library holds the only known manuscript of Beowulf, dated circa 1000.
Brian Lang, chief executive of the library, explained on the website:
"The Beowulf manuscript is a unique treasure and imposes on the Library
a responsibility to scholars throughout the world. Digital photography
offered for the first time the possibility of recording text concealed
by early repairs, and a less expensive and safer way of recording
readings under special light conditions. (…) This work has not only
advanced scholarship; it has also captured the imagination of a wider
public, engaging people (through press reports and the availability
over computer networks of selected images and text) in the appreciation
of one of the primary artefacts of our shared cultural heritage."

***

The British Library began offering digitized versions of its treasures,
for example Beowulf, the earliest known narrative poem in English and
one of the most famous works of Anglo-Saxon poetry.

The British Library holds the only known manuscript of Beowulf, dated
circa 1000. The poem itself is much older than the manuscript  -- some
historians believe it might have been written circa 750. The manuscript
was badly damaged by fire in 1731. 18th-century transcripts mentioned
hundreds of words and characters which were then visible along the
charred edges, and subsequently crumbled away over the years. To halt
this process, each leaf was mounted on a paper frame in 1845.

As explained on the website of the British Library, scholarly
discussions on the date of creation and provenance of the poem
continued around the world, and researchers regularly required access
to the manuscript. Taking Beowulf out of its display case for study not
only raised conservation issues, it also made it unavailable for the
many visitors who were coming to the British Library expecting to see
this literary treasure on display. Digitization of the manuscript
offered a solution to these problems, as well as providing new
opportunities for researchers and readers worldwide.

The Electronic Beowulf Project was launched as a database of digital
images of the Beowulf manuscript, as well as related manuscripts and
printed texts. In 1998, the database included the fiber-optic readings
of hidden characters and ultra-violet readings of erased text in the
manuscript; the full electronic facsimiles of the 18th-century
transcripts of the manuscript; and selections from the main 19th-
century collations, editions and translations.

Major additions to the database were planned for the following years,
such as images of contemporary manuscripts, links to the Toronto
Dictionary of Old English Project, and links to the comprehensive
Anglo-Saxon bibliographies of the Old English Newsletter.

The database project was developed in partnership with two leading
experts in the United States, Kevin Kiernan, from the University of
Kentucky, and Paul Szarmach, from the Medieval Institute of Western
Michigan University. Kevin Kiernan edited the electronic archive and
supervised the making of a CD-ROM with the main electronic images.

Brian Lang, chief executive of the British Library, explained on its
website: "The Beowulf manuscript is a unique treasure and imposes on
the Library a responsibility to scholars throughout the world. Digital
photography offered for the first time the possibility of recording
text concealed by early repairs, and a less expensive and safer way of
recording readings under special light conditions. It also offers the
prospect of using image enhancement technology to settle doubtful
readings in the text. Network technology has facilitated direct
collaboration with American scholars and makes it possible for scholars
around the world to share in these discoveries. Curatorial and
computing staff learned a great deal which will inform any future
programmes of digitization and network service provision the Library
may undertake, and our publishing department is considering the
publication of an electronic scholarly edition of Beowulf. This work
has not only advanced scholarship; it has also captured the imagination
of a wider public, engaging people (through press reports and the
availability over computer networks of selected images and text) in the
appreciation of one of the primary artefacts of our shared cultural
heritage."

# Other treasures of the British Library

Other digitized treasures of the British Library were available online
as well, for example Magna Carta, the first English constitutional
text, signed in 1215, with the Great Seal of King John; the Lindisfarne
Gospels, dated 698; the Diamond Sutra, dated 868, sometimes referred to
as the world's earliest print book; the Sforza Hours, a Renaissance
treasure dated 1490-1520; the Codex Arundel, with notes by Leonardo Da
Vinci from 1478 to 1518; and the Tyndale New Testament, as the first
English translation of the New Testament, printed in 1526 by Peter
Schoeffer in Worms, Germany.

In November 2000, the British Library released a digitized version of
the original Gutenberg Bible on its website. Gutenberg printed its
Bible in 1454 in Mainz, Germany, perhaps printing 180 copies, with 48
copies still available in 2000, and two full copies at the British
Library. A little different from each other, both were digitized in
March 2000 by Japanese experts from Keio University of Tokyo and NTT
(Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Communications). The images were then
processed to offer a digitized version available online a few months
later, for the world to enjoy.

# German rare prints

The Bielefeld University Library (Bibliothek der Universität Bielefeld)
in Germany offered online versions of German rare prints. Michael
Behrens, in charge of the digital library project, wrote in September
1998: " We started digitizing rare prints from our own library, and
some rare prints which were sent in via library loan, in November 1996.
(...) In that first phase of our attempts at digitization, starting
November 1996 and ending June 1997, 38 rare prints were scanned as
image files and made available via the web. (…) The next step, which is
just being completed, is the digitization of the Berlinische
Monatsschrift, a German periodical from the Enlightenment, comprising
58 volumes, and 2,574 articles on 30,626 pages. A somewhat bigger
digitization project of German periodicals from the 18th and early 19th
century is planned. The size will be about 1,000,000 pages. These
periodicals will be not just from the holdings of this library, but the
project would be coordinated here, and some of the technical would be
done here, also." (NEF Interview)

# The ARTFL Encyclopédie

The same year, the database of the first volume (1751) of the
Encyclopédie by Diderot and d’Alembert was available online as an
experiment from ARTFL (American and French Research on the Treasury of
the French Language), a common project from the CNRS (Centre National
de la Recherche Scientifique  -- National Scientific Research Center)
in France and the University of Chicago in Illinois. This online
experiment was a first step towards a full online version of the first
edition (1751-1772) of the Encyclopédie, with 72,000 articles written
by 140 contributors (Voltaire, Rousseau, Marmontel, d'Holbach, Turgot,
and others), 17 volumes of text (with 18,000 pages and  21,7 million
words) and 11 volumes of plates. Designed to collect and disseminate
the entire knowledge of the time, the Encyclopédie was a reflection of
the intellectual and social currents of the Enlightenment, and
contributed to disseminate novel ideas that would inspire the French
Revolution in 1789.



1998 > WEB-EXTENDED COMMERCIAL BOOKS


[Summary]
Murray Suid is a writer of educational books and material living in
Palo Alto, Silicon Valley, California. He has also written books for
kids, multimedia scripts and screenplays. Murray was among the first
authors to add a website to his books  -- an idea that many would soon
adopt. He explained in September 1998: "If a book can be web-extended
(living partly in cyberspace), then an author can easily update and
correct it, whereas otherwise the author would have to wait a long time
for the next edition, if indeed a next edition ever came out. (...) I
do not know if I will publish books on the web  -- as opposed to
publishing paper books. Probably that will happen when books become
multimedia. (I currently am helping develop multimedia learning
materials, and it is a form of teaching that I like a lot  -- blending
text, movies, audio, graphics, and  -- when possible  --
interactivity)."

***

Murray Suid, a writer of educational books and material based in Palo
Alto, California, was among the first authors to add a website to his
books  -- an idea that many would soon adopt.

Murray has also written books for kids, multimedia scripts and
screenplays. He explained in September 1998: "The internet has become
my major research tool, largely  -- but not entirely  -- replacing the
traditional library and even replacing person-to-person research. Now,
instead of phoning people or interviewing them face to face, I do it
via email. Because of speed, it has also enabled me to collaborate with
people at a distance, particularly on screenplays. (I've worked with
two producers in Germany.) Also, digital correspondence is so easy to
store and organize, I find that I have easy access to information
exchanged this way. Thus, emailing facilitates keeping track of ideas
and materials. The internet has increased my correspondence
dramatically. Like most people, I find that email works better than
snail mail. My geographic range of correspondents has also increased  -
- extending mainly to Europe. In the old days, I hardly ever did
transatlantic penpalling. I also find that emailing is so easy, I am
able to find more time to assist other writers with their work  -- a
kind of a virtual writing group. This isn't merely altruistic. I gain a
lot when I give feedback. But before the internet, doing so was more of
an effort."

How about web-extended books? "If a book can be web-extended (living
partly in cyberspace), then an author can easily update and correct it,
whereas otherwise the author would have to wait a long time for the
next edition, if indeed a next edition ever came out. (...) I do not
know if I will publish books on the web  -- as opposed to publishing
paper books. Probably that will happen when books become multimedia. (I
currently am helping develop multimedia learning materials, and it is a
form of teaching that I like a lot  -- blending text, movies, audio,
graphics, and  -- when possible  -- interactivity)."

He added in August 1999: "In addition to 'web-extending' books, we are
now web-extending our multimedia (CD-ROM) products  -- to update and
enrich them."

He added In October 2000: "Our company  -- EDVantage Software  -- has
become an internet company instead of a multimedia (CD-ROM) company. We
deliver educational material online to students and teachers."



1998 > A MORE RESTRICTIVE COPYRIGHT LAW


[Summary]
A major blow for digital libraries was the amendment to the 1976 U.S.
Copyright Act signed on 27 October 1998, each legislation being been
more restrictive than the previous one. As explained in July 1999 by
Michael Hart, founder of Project Gutenberg: "Nothing will expire for
another 20 years. We used to have to wait 75 years. Now it is 95 years.
And it was 28 years (+ a possible 28-year extension, only on request)
before that, and 14 years (+ a possible 14-year extension) before that.
So, as you can see, this is a serious degrading of the public domain,
as a matter of continuing policy." The copyright went from an average
of 30 years in 1909 to an average of 95 years in 1998, with an
extension of 65 years. Only a book published before 1923 could now be
considered for sure as belonging to the public domain in the U.S. The
copyright legislation became more restrictive too in the European
Union.

***

A major blow for digital libraries was the amendment to the 1976 U.S.
Copyright Act signed on 27 October 1998, followed by a more restrictive
legislation too in the European Union.

Each legislation was more restrictive than the previous one. As
explained in July 1999 by Michael Hart, founder of Project Gutenberg:
"Nothing will expire for another 20 years. We used to have to wait 75
years. Now it is 95 years. And it was 28 years (+ a possible 28-year
extension, only on request) before that, and 14 years (+ a possible 14-
year extension) before that. So, as you can see, this is a serious
degrading of the public domain, as a matter of continuing policy. (…)
No one has said more against copyright extensions than I have, but
Hollywood and the big publishers have seen to it that our Congress
won't even mention it in public. The kind of copyright debate going on
is totally impractical. It is run by and for the 'Landed Gentry of the
Information Age.' 'Information Age'? For whom?"

John Mark Ockerbloom, founder of The Online Books Page, wrote in August
1999: "I think it is important for people on the web to understand that
copyright is a social contract that is designed for the public good --
where the public includes both authors and readers. This means that
authors should have the right to exclusive use of their creative works
for limited times, as is expressed in current copyright law. But it
also means that their readers have the right to copy and reuse the work
at will once copyright expires. In the U.S. now, there are various
efforts to take rights away from readers, by restricting fair use,
lengthening copyright terms (even with some proposals to make them
perpetual) and extending intellectual property to cover facts separate
from creative works (such as found in the 'database copyright'
proposals).“

The shrinking of public domain also affected the European Union, where
copyright laws went from "author's life + 50 years" to "author's life +
70 years", following pressure from content owners who successfully
lobbied for "harmonization" of national copyright laws as a response to
"globalization of the market".

To regulate the copyright of digital editions in the wake of the
relevant WIPO international treaties signed in 1996, the Digital
Millenium Copyright Act (DMCA) was ratified in October 1998 in the
United States, and the European Union Copyright Directive (EUCD) was
ratified in May 2001 by the European Commission. Each country in the
European Union was requested to draft and pass its own legislation
within a given time frame. In France, DADVSI (Droit d'Auteur et Droits
Voisins dans la Société de l'Information) passed in August 2006, with
the general public being not so happy about it.



1998 > THE FIRST EBOOK READERS


[Summary]
How about a book-sized electronic device that could store many books at
once? The first ebook readers were developed in Silicon Valley,
California. The Rocket eBook was launched in 1998 in Palo Alto by
NuvoMedia, whose investors were Barnes & Noble and Bertelsmann. Shortly
afterwards, the SoftBook Reader was launched by SoftBook Press, whose
investors were Random House and Simon & Schuster. These two ebook
readers were the size of a (large and thick) book, with batteries and a
black and white LCD screen. They could connect to the internet through
a computer (for the Rocket eBook) or directly with a built-in modem
(for the SoftBook Reader) to download books from the digital bookstores
available on the companies’ websites. Other models followed in 1999,
for example the EveryBook Reader, launched by EveryBook, and the
Millennium eBook, launched by Librius. The Gemstar eBook was launched
in the U.S. in November 2000. The Cybook (1st generation) was in Europe
in January 2001.

***

How about a book-sized electronic device that could store many books at
once? The first ebook readers were the Rocket eBook and the SoftBook
Reader, launched in Silicon Valley in 1998.

These dedicated electronic readers were the size of a (large and thick)
book, with a battery, a black and white LCD screen, and a storage
capacity of ten books or so. They could connect to the internet through
a computer (for the Rocket eBook) or directly with a built-in modem
(for the SoftBook Reader).

They got much attention from book professionals and the general public,
with few of them buying them though, because of their rocket-high price
-- several hundreds of dollars -- and a small choice of books in the
digital bookstores available on the companies’ websites. Publishers
were just beginning to digitize their own books, still wondering how to
market them, and worried with piracy concerns.

# The Rocket eBook

The Rocket eBook was launched in 1998 as the first dedicated ebook
reader by NuvoMedia, a company founded in 1997 in Palo Alto. The
investors of NuvoMedia were Barnes & Noble and Bertelsmann. NuvoMedia
wanted to become "the electronic book distribution solution, by
providing a networking infrastructure for publishers, retailers and end
users to publish, distribute, purchase and read electronic content
securely and efficiently on the internet". The Rocket eBook could
connect to a computer (PC or Macintosh) through the Rocket eBook
Cradle, a device with two cables, a cable for power through a wall
transformer, and a serial cable for the computer.

# The SoftBook Reader

Shortly afterwards, SoftBook Press launched the SoftBook Reader, along
with the SoftBook Network, “an internet-based content delivery
service”. The investors of Softbook Press were Random House and Simon &
Schuster. With the SoftBook Reader, "people could easily, quickly and
securely download a wide selection of books and periodicals using its
built-in internet connection". The device, "unlike a computer, was
ergonomically designed for the reading of long documents and books."

# Other ebook readers

Other ebook readers were launched in 1999, for example the EveryBook
Reader, launched by EveryBook, and the Millennium eBook, launched by
Librius.

The EveryBook Reader was "a living library in a single book", with a
"hidden" modem to dial into the EveryBook Store, for people “to browse,
purchase, and receive full text books, magazines, and sheet music”.

The Millennium eBook was a "small low-cost" ebook reader launched by
Librius, a "full service e-commerce company". On the company website, a
World Bookstore "delivered digital copies of thousands of books" via
the internet.

All these ebook readers didn’t last long. People would have to wait to
get through the millenium to see the Gemstar eBook in the U.S. and the
Cybook (1st generation) in Europe.

# The Gemstar eBook

The Gemstar eBook was launched in November 2000 after Gemstar bought in
January 2000 Nuvomedia (author of the Rocket eBook) and SoftBook Press
(author of the SoftBook Reader), the two companies that created the
first ebook readers. Two versions of the Gemstar eBook were available
for sale in the U.S., the REB 1100 (successor of the Rocket eBook) with
a black and white screen, and the REB 1200 (successor of the SoftBook
Reader) with a color screen, both produced under the RCA label,
belonging to Thomson Multimedia. Gemstar tried to launch them in Europe
too, beginning with Germany, while buying 00h00, a French publisher of
ebooks, in September 2000. In fall 2002, cheaper ebook readers were
launched as GEB 1150 and 2150, produced by Gemstar instead of RCA.
Sales were still far below expectations. The company stopped selling
ebook readers in June 2003, and stopped selling ebooks the following
month.

# The Cybook

The first European ebook reader didn’t work well either. Developed by
Cytale, a French company created by Olivier Pujol, the Cybook (21 x 16
cm, 1 kilo) was launched in January 2001. Its memory -- 32 M of SDRAM
and 16 M of flash memory -- could store 15.000 pages, or 30 books of
500 pages. Sales were far below expectations, and Cytale closed its
doors in July 2002. This model was later renamed Cybook 1st generation,
waiting for more generations to come. The Cybook project was taken over
by Bookeen, a company created in 2003 by Michael Dahan and Laurent
Picard, two former engineers from Cytale. The Cybook 2nd generation was
available in June 2004. The Cybook Gen3 (3rd generation) was available
in July 2007, with a screen using the E Ink technology.



1999 > LIBRARIANS IN CYBERSPACE


[Summary]
To help their patrons deal with the internet, to select and organize
information for them, to create and maintain websites, to check
specialized online databases, and to update online catalogs became
daily tasks for librarians. As stated in August 1999 by Bruno Didier,
webmaster of the Pasteur Institute Library in Paris, France: "Our
relationship with both the information and the users has changed. We
are increasingly becoming mediators, and perhaps to a lesser extent
'curators'. My present activity is typical of this new situation: I am
working to provide quick access to information and to create effective
means of communication, but I also train people to use these new tools.
(...) I think the future of our job is tied to cooperation and use of
common resources. It is certainly an old project, but it is really the
first time we have had the means to set it up."

***

To help their patrons deal with the internet, to select and organize
information for them, to create and maintain websites, to check
specialized databases and to update online catalogs became daily tasks
for librarians.

Here are two examples, with Peter Raggett at the Central Library of
OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development) and Bruno
Didier at the Library of the Pasteur Institute in Paris, France.

# At the OECD Central Library

Based at the OECD headquarters in Paris, the Central Library offered
60,000 monographs and 2,500 periodicals in 1998, as well as microfilms,
CD-ROMs, and databases like Dialog, Lexis-Nexis and UnCover. The
library began setting up its own webpages in 1996, on the intranet of
the organization, in order to support the staff’s research work.

Peter Raggett, deputy-head (and then head) of the Central Library,
wrote in August 1999: "At the OECD Library we have collected together
several hundred websites and have put links to them on the OECD
intranet. They are sorted by subject and each site has a short
annotation giving some information about it. The researcher can then
see if it is possible that the site contains the desired information.
This is adding value to the site references and in this way the Central
Library has built up a virtual reference desk on the OECD network. As
well as the annotated links, this virtual reference desk contains pages
of references to articles, monographs and websites relevant to several
projects currently being researched at the OECD, network access to CD-
ROMs, and a monthly list of new acquisitions. The library catalogue
will soon be available for searching on the intranet. The reference
staff at the OECD Library uses the internet for a good deal of their
work. Often an academic working paper will be on the web and will be
available for full-text downloading. We are currently investigating
supplementing our subscriptions to certain of our periodicals with
access to the electronic versions on the internet."

What about finding information on the internet? "The internet has
provided researchers with a vast database of information. The problem
for them is to find what they are seeking. Never has the information
overload been so obvious as when one tries to find information on a
topic by searching the internet. When one uses a search engine like
Lycos or AltaVista or a directory like Yahoo!, it soon becomes clear
that it can be very difficult to find valuable sites on a given topic.
These search mechanisms work well if one is searching for something
very precise, such as information on a person who has an unusual name,
but they produce a confusing number of references if one is searching
for a topic which can be quite broad. Try and search the web for Russia
AND transport to find statistics on the use of trains, planes and buses
in Russia. The first references you will find are freight-forwarding
firms that have business connections with Russia."

How about the future? "The internet is impinging on many peoples'
lives, and information managers are the best people to help researchers
around the labyrinth. The internet is just in its infancy and we are
all going to be witnesses to its growth and refinement. (...)
Information managers have a large role to play in searching and
arranging the information on the internet. I expect that there will be
an expansion in internet use for education and research. This means
that libraries will have to create virtual libraries where students can
follow a course offered by an institution at the other side of the
world. Personally, I see myself becoming more and more a virtual
librarian. My clients may not meet me face-to-face but instead will
contact me by email, telephone or fax, and I will do the research and
send them the results electronically."

# At the Pasteur Institute Library

The Pasteur Institutes are observatories for studying infectious and
parasite-borne diseases. After being a “traditional” librarian, Bruno
Didier created in 1996 the website of the Pasteur Institute Library in
Paris, France, and became its webmaster.

He explained in August 1999: "The main aim of the Pasteur Institute
Library website is to serve the Institute itself and its associated
bodies. It supports applications that have become essential in such a
big organization: bibliographic databases, cataloging, ordering of
documents and of course access to online periodicals (presently more
than 100). It is a window for our different departments, at the
Institute but also elsewhere in France and abroad. It plays a big part
in documentation exchanges with the institutes in the worldwide Pasteur
network. I am trying to make it an interlink adapted to our needs for
exploration and use of the internet. The website has existed in its
present form since 1996 and its audience is steadily increasing. (...)
I build and maintain the webpages and monitor them regularly. I am also
responsible for training our patrons to use the internet."

What has changed in his work? "Our relationship with both the
information and the users is what changes. We are increasingly becoming
mediators, and perhaps to a lesser extent 'curators'. My present
activity is typical of this new situation: I am working to provide
quick access to information and to create effective means of
communication, but I also train people to use these new tools. (...) I
think the future of our job is tied to cooperation and use of common
resources. It is certainly an old project, but it is really the first
time we have had the means to set it up."



1999 > The ULYSSES BOOKSTORE ON THE WEB


[Summary]
Founded in 1971 by Catherine Domain in Paris, France, Librairie Ulysse
(Ulysses Bookstore) is the oldest bookstore dedicated only to travel,
with 20,000 books, maps and magazines, out of print and new, about any
country, all packed up in a tiny space, with some treasures impossible
to find anywhere else. Catherine, an avid traveler herself, started a
website in early 1999, as a virtual travel in the field of computing,
despite knowing very little about computers. She wrote in late 1999:
"My website is still pretty basic and under construction. Like my
bookstore, it is a place to meet people before being a place of
business. The internet is a pain in the neck, takes a lot of my time
and I earn hardly any money, but that doesn't worry me... I am very
pessimistic though, because it is killing off specialist bookstores."
Ten years later, in April 2010, Catherine was much less pessimistic,
because the internet had allowed her to become a publisher of travel
books.

***

Founded in 1971 by Catherine Domain in Paris, France, Librairie Ulysse
(Ulysses Bookstore) is the oldest bookstore in the world dedicated only
to travel. The bookstore launched its website in 1999 and a small
publishing venture in 2010.

Nested on Ile Saint-Louis surrounded by the river Seine, Librairie
Ulysse has offered 20,000 books, maps and magazines, out of print and
new, about any country, all packed up in a tiny space, with some
treasures impossible to find anywhere else.

# Beginning

What were the first steps of Librairie Ulysse? Catherine wrote on the
bookstore’s website: “After traveling for ten years on every continent,
I stopped and told myself: ‘What am I going to do for a living?’ I was
aware of the need to insert myself in a sociey in one way or another. I
made a choice by deduction, refusing to have any boss or employee.

Remembering my grandfathers, one being a navigator, and the other one
being a bookseller in Perigord [a region in Southern France], and
noting that I needed to visit more than a dozen bookstores before
finding any documentation on a country as close as Greece, a ‘travel
bookstore’ came to my mind during a world tour while I was sailing
between Colombo and Surabaya.

Back in Paris -- I already lived in Île Saint-Louis -- I looked for a
place, gathered information about the job of bookseller, did some
internships in other bookstores, wrote index cards, and thought about a
name for this new business.

One morning, while going out to buy my daily newspaper, I looked up and
saw the sign of the bookstore ‘Ulysse’ [Ulysses in French], a reference
to Joyce, at number 35 of street Saint-Louis-en-l'Île. ‘Here is a
name!’, I told myself. I climbed two stairs to get into this very small
16m2 store with a single beam. Four guys played poker. ‘What a cute
bookstore!’, I said. ‘It is for sale’, one of the players answered
without looking up. 48 hours later, I was a bookseller. This was in
September 1971. The first bookstore in the world specializing in travel
was born.

Twenty years later, I was hit by real estate development, like a number
of people, and I had to move out. Luckily, my stubborn side -- I am a
Taurus ascendant Taurus -- gave me the strength to move my bookstore a
few meters away into a larger place, on number 26 of street Saint-
Louis-en-l'Île, in a quite uncommon building. First, this was the first
building in which I lived in Île Saint-Louis. Second, this building
formerly hosted a bank branch that was famously burglarized by
Spaggiari.”

# In 1999

Even after she became a bookseller, Catherine went on traveling every
summer, usually sailing on the Mediterranean, the Atlantic or the
Pacific, while her boyfriend was running the bookstore.

She has been a member of the French National Union of Antiquarian and
Modern Bookstores (SLAM: Syndicat National de la Librairie Ancienne et
Moderne), the Explorers' Club (Club des Explorateurs) and the
International Club of Long-Distance Travelers (Club International des
Grands Voyageurs).

Catherine started the bookstore’s website in early 1999, as a virtual
travel in the field of computing, despite knowing very little about
computers.

She wrote in late 1999: "My site is still pretty basic and under
construction. Like my bookstore, it is a place to meet people before
being a place of business. The internet is a pain in the neck, takes a
lot of my time and I earn hardly any money, but that doesn't worry
me... I am very pessimistic though, because it is killing off
specialist bookstores."

Local bookstores were closing one after the other in Paris, having a
hard time keeping up with the competition of Amazon.fr, Fnac.com and
the likes.

# In 2005

Catherine nevertheless created a second travel bookstore in 2005, this
time facing the ocean, in Hendaye, a city on the Southern coast of the
Atlantic. Open from 20 June to 20 September, the bookstore can be found
along the beach in a Moorish building, a historical monument that
formerly hosted the casino. At high tide, the bookstore is like “a
steamer of books that is going to set sail, and sometimes does”,
because it is flooded by the sea.

# In 2010

Ten years after starting her website, Catherine was much less
pessimistic about the internet. This “new” medium had allowed her to
become a publisher of travel books.

She wrote in April 2010: "The internet has taken more and more space in
my life! On 1st April 2010, I became a publisher after some painful
training in Photoshop, InDesign, and other software.

This is also a great joy to see that the political will to keep people
in front of their computers for them not to start a revolution can be
defeated by giant and spontaneous happy hours [organized in Europe
through Facebook] with thousands of people who want to see, and speak
with, each other in person.

In the end, there will always be unexpected developments to new
inventions, among other things. When I started using the internet, I
really didn't expect to become a publisher."



1999 > THE INTERNET AS A NOVEL CHARACTER


[Summary]
Alain Bron is an information systems consultant and a writer living in
Paris, France. The internet is one of the characters of his second
novel, "Sanguine sur toile" (Sanguine on the Web), available in print
from Le Choucas in 1999, and in PDF from 00h00 in 2000. His novel won
the Lions Club International Prize in 2000. Alain wrote in November
1999: "In French, 'toile' means the web as well as the canvas of a
painting, and 'sanguine' is the red chalk of a drawing as well as one
of the adjectives derived from blood ('sang' in French). But would a
love of colors justify a murder? 'Sanguine sur toile' is the strange
story of an internet surfer caught up in an upheaval inside his own
computer, which is being remotely operated by a very mysterious person
whose only aim is revenge.”

***

The internet is one of the characters of Alain Bron’s second novel,
"Sanguine sur Toile", available in print from Le Choucas in 1999, and
in PDF from 00h00 in 2000. This novel won the Lions Club International
Prize in 2000.

# About the novel

Alain Bron wrote in November 1999 in an email interview: "In French,
'toile' means the web as well as the canvas of a painting, and
'sanguine' is the red chalk of a drawing as well as one of the
adjectives derived from blood ('sang' in French). But would a love of
colors justify a murder? 'Sanguine sur toile' is the strange story of
an internet surfer caught up in an upheaval inside his own computer,
which is being remotely operated by a very mysterious person whose only
aim is revenge.

I wanted to take the reader into the worlds of painting and enterprise,
which intermingle, escaping and meeting up again in the dazzle of
software. The reader is invited to try to untangle for himself the
threads twisted by passion alone. To penetrate the mystery, he will
have to answer many questions. Even with the world at his fingertips,
isn't the internet surfer the loneliest person in the world? In view of
the competition, what is the greatest degree of violence possible in an
enterprise these days? Does painting tend to reflect the world or does
it create another one? I also wanted to show that images are not that
peaceful. You can use them to take action, even to kill."

What part has the internet played in his novel? "The internet is a
character in itself. Instead of being described in its technical
complexity, it is depicted as a character that can be either
threatening, kind or amusing. Remember the computer screen has a dual
role -- displaying as well as concealing. This ambivalence is the theme
throughout. In such a game, the big winner is of course the one who
knows how to free himself from the machine's grip and put humanism and
intelligence before everything else."

# About the author

Alain Bron is both an information system consultant and a writer. He
explained in the same email interview: “I spent about 20 years at Bull.
There I was involved in all the adventures of computer and
telecommunications development. I represented the computer industry at
ISO [International Organization for Standardization] and chaired the
network group of the X/Open consortium. I also took part in the very
beginning of the internet with my colleagues of Honeywell in the U.S.
in late 1978. I am now [in November 1999] an information systems
consultant, where I keep the main computer projects of firms and their
foreign subsdiaries running smoothly. And I write. I have been writing
since I was a teenager. Short stories (about 100), psycho-sociological
essays, articles and novels. It is an inner need as well as a very
great pleasure.”

As for the aim of the internet, “the important thing is the human value
that is added to it. The internet can never be shrewd about a
situation, take a risk or replace the intelligence of the heart. The
internet simply speeds up the decision-making process and reduces
uncertainty by providing information. We still have to leave time to
time, let ideas mature and bring an essential touch of humanity to a
relationship. For me, the aim of the internet is meeting people, not
increasing the number of electronic exchanges.”

What was his best experience with the internet? “After my novel
‘Sanguine sur toile’ was published, I got a message from a friend I'd
lost touch with more than 20 years ago. He recognized himself as one of
the book's characters. We saw each other again recently over a good
bottle of wine and swapped memories and discussed our plans.”



2000 > ENCYCLOPEDIAS AND DICTIONARIES


[Summary]
The first reference encyclopedias and dictionaries available online
stemmed from print versions. Britannica.com was available in December
1999 as the web version of the 32-volume Encyclopaedia Britannica,
first for free and then for a fee. The French-language WebEncyclo from
Editions Atlas was available at the same time, for free, as well as the
Encyclopaedia Universalis, for a fee. The first major online
dictionaries also stemmed from print versions, for example the free
Merriam-Webster Online launched in 1996, that included the Webster
Dictionary, the Webster Thesaurus, and other tools. The French-language
“Dictionnaire Universel Francophone en Ligne “ from Hachette was
available for free in 1997. The online version of the 20-volume Oxford
English Dictionary (OED) was available in March 2000 for a fee.
Designed directly for the web, the Grand Dictionnaire Terminologique
(GDT) was launched in September 2000 in Quebec as the largest free
French-English terminology dictionary, and quickly praised by linguists
worldwide.

***

The first reference encyclopedias and dictionaries available online
stemmed from print versions.

# Encyclopedias

Britannica.com was launched in December 1999 as the digital equivalent
of the 32 volumes of the 15th edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica.
The website was available for free, as a complement to the print and
CD-ROM versions for sale, with a selection of articles from 70
magazines, a guide to the best websites, a selection of books, etc.,
all searchable through a single search engine. In September 2000, the
site was among the top 100 websites in the world. In July 2001, the
website, not free anymore, could be searched for a monthly or annual
fee. In 2009, Britannica.com opened its website to external
contributors, with registration required to write and edit articles.

Launched by Editions Atlas in December 1999 and stemming from a print
encyclopedia, Webencyclo was the first main French-language online
encyclopedia available for free. It was searchable by keyword, topic
and media (i.e. maps, links, photos, illustrations). A call for papers
invited specialists in a given topic to become external contributors
and submit articles in a section called "Webencyclo Contributif". Later
on, a free registration was required to use the online encyclopedia.

Launched at the same time, the website of the print French-language
Encyclopedia Universalis included 28,000 articles by 4,000
contributors, available for an annual subscription fee, with a number
of articles available for free.

# Dictionaries

Merriam-Webster, a well-known publisher of dictionaries, launched in
1996 the website "Merriam-Webster Online: The Language Center" to give
free access to online resources stemming from several print reference
works: Webster Dictionary, Webster Thesaurus, Webster's Third (a
lexical landmark), Guide to International Business Communications,
Vocabulary Builder (with interactive vocabulary quizzes), and the
Barnhart Dictionary Companion (hot new words). The website’s goal was
also to help track down definitions, spellings, pronunciations,
synonyms, vocabulary exercises, and other key facts about words and
language.

The "Dictionnaire Universel Francophone en Ligne" (Universal French-
Language Online Dictionary) was the web version of the "Dictionnaire
Universel Francophone", published by Hachette in partnership with
AUPELF-UREF (which later became AUF: Agence Universitaire de la
Francophonie - University Agency of Francophony). The dictionary
included not only standard French but also the French-language words
and expressions used worldwide. French was spoken by 500 million people
in 50 countries. As a side remark, English and French are the only
official and/or cultural languages widely spread on five continents.

The online version (for a subscription fee) of the 20-volume Oxford
English Dictionary (OED) was launched in March 2000 by Oxford
University Press (OUP), followed by a quarterly update with around
1,000 new or revised entries. Two years later, Oxford University Press
launched Oxford Reference Online (ORO), a comprehensive encyclopedia
designed directly for the web and also available for a subscription
fee. Its 60,000 webpages and one million entries could represent the
equivalent of 100 print encyclopedias.

# The GDT from Quebec

With 3 million terms related to industry, science and commerce, the GDT
(Grand Dictionnaire Terminologique - Main Terminological Dictionary)
was the largest French-English online terminology dictionary. The GDT
was designed directly for the web by OQLF (Office Québécois de la
Langue Française - Quebecois Office of the French Language) and
launched in September 2000 as a free service. The GDT was a
technological challenge, and the result of a partnership between OQLF,
author of the dictionary, and Semantix, a company specialized in
linguistic software. The GDT had 1.3 million individual visits during
the first month, with peaks of 60,000 visits per day, which certainly
contributed to better translations. The database was then maintained by
Convera Canada, with 3.5 million visits per month in February 2003. A
revamped version of the GDT went online in March 2003, with the
database maintained by OQLF itself, and the addition of Latin as a
third language.



2000 > THE WEB PORTAL YOURDICTIONARY.COM


[Summary]
Robert Beard, a language teacher at Bucknell University, in Lewisburg,
Pennsylvania (USA), co-founded yourDictionary.com in February 2000 as a
follow-up of his first website, A Web of Online Dictionaries (included
in the new one), launched in 1995 as a directory of online dictionaries
(with 800 links in fall 1998) and other linguistic resources such as
thesauri, vocabularies, glossaries, grammars and language textbooks.
yourDictionary.com included 1,800 dictionaries in 250 languages in
September 2003, and 2,500 dictionaries in 300 languages in April 2007.
As a portal for all languages without any exception, the site also
offered a section for endangered languages, called the Endangered
Language Repository.

***

Five years before co-founding yourDictionary.com in February 2000, as
the portal for all languages without any exception, Robert Beard
created the website A Web of Online Dictionaries (WOD) in 1995.

Robert Beard was a language teacher at Bucknell University, in
Lewisburg, Pennsylvania. In September 1998, his website provided an
index of 800 online dictionaries in 150 languages, as well as sections
for multilingual dictionaries, specialized English dictionaries,
thesauri and other vocabulary aids, language identifiers and guessers,
an index of dictionary indices, the “Web of Online Grammars”, and the
“Web of Linguistic Fun”, i.e. linguistics for non-specialists.

Robert Beard wrote in September 1998: "There was an initial fear that
the web posed a threat to multilingualism on the web, since HTML and
other programming languages are based on English and since there are
simply more websites in English than any other language. However, my
websites indicate that multilingualism is very much alive and the web
may, in fact, serve as a vehicle for preserving many endangered
languages. I now have links to dictionaries in 150 languages and
grammars of 65 languages. Moreover, the new attention paid by browser
developers to the different languages of the world will encourage even
more websites in different languages." (NEF Interview)

Fifteen months later, Robert Beard included his website into a larger
project, yourDictionary.com, that he co-founded in early 2000.

He wrote in January 2000: "The new website is an index of 1,200+
dictionaries in more than 200 languages. Besides the WOD, the new
website includes a word-of-the-day-feature, word games, a language chat
room, the old 'Web of Online Grammars' (now expanded to include
additional language resources), the 'Web of Linguistic Fun',
multilingual dictionaries; specialized English dictionaries; thesauri
and other vocabulary aids; language identifiers and guessers, and other
features; dictionary indices. yourDictionary.com will hopefully be the
premiere language portal and the largest language resource site on the
web. It is now actively acquiring dictionaries and grammars of all
languages with a particular focus on endangered languages. It is
overseen by a blue ribbon panel of linguistic experts from all over the
world. (...)

Indeed, yourDictionary.com has lots of new ideas. We plan to work with
the Endangered Language Fund in the U.S. and Britain to raise money for
the Foundation's work and publish the results on our site. We will have
language chat rooms and bulletin boards. There will be language games
designed to entertain and teach fundamentals of linguistics. The
Linguistic Fun page will become an online journal for short,
interesting, yes, even entertaining, pieces on language that are based
on sound linguistics by experts from all over the world."

As the portal for all languages without any exception,
yourDictionary.com offered a section for endangered languages called
the Endangered Language Repository.

As explained by Robert Beard: "Languages that are endangered are
primarily languages without writing systems at all (only 1/3 of the
world's 6,000+ languages have writing systems). I still do not see the
web contributing to the loss of language identity and still suspect it
may, in the long run, contribute to strengthening it. More and more
Native Americans, for example, are contacting linguists, asking them to
write grammars of their language and help them put up dictionaries. For
these people, the web is an affordable boon for cultural expression."

How about the future of the web? "The web will be an encyclopedia of
the world by the world for the world. There will be no information or
knowledge that anyone needs that will not be available. The major
hindrance to international and interpersonal understanding, personal
and institutional enhancement, will be removed. It would take a wilder
imagination than mine to predict the effect of this development on the
nature of humankind."



2000 > A STANDARD FORMAT FOR EBOOKS


[Summary]
With so many formats showing up in 1998-2001 for new electronic
devices, the digital publishing industry felt the need to work on a
standard for ebooks. The National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) in the U.S. launched the Open eBook Initiative in June 1998,
with a 25-people task force named Open eBook Authoring Group. In
September 1999 was released the first version of the Open eBook (OeB)
format, based on XML (eXtensible Markup Language) and defined by the
Open eBook Publication Structure (OeBPS), with a free version belonging
to public domain and a full version to be used with or without DRM by
the publishing industry. The Open eBook Forum (OeBF) was created in
January 2000 to develop the OeB format and OeBPS specifications. Since
2000, most ebook formats have derived from the OeB format, for example
the PRC format from Mobipocket and the LIT format from Microsoft.

***

With so many formats showing up in 1998-2001 for new electronic
devices, the digital publishing industry felt the need to work on a
standard for ebooks.

On top of the “classical” formats -- TXT (text), DOC (Microsoft Word),
HTML (HyperText Markup Language), XML (eXtensible Markup Language) and
PDF (Portable Document Format) -- other formats were the Glassbook
Reader, the Peanut Reader, the Rocket eBook Reader (for the Rocket
eBook), the Franklin Reader (for the eBookMan), the Cytale software
(for the Cybook 1st generation), the Gemstar eBook Reader (for the
Gemstar eBook) and the Palm Reader (for the Palm Pilot). Some formats
were meant for a given device, either a PDA or an ebook reader, and
couldn’t be used on other devices.

# Open eBook (OeB)

The National Institute of Standards & Technology (NIST) in the U.S.
launched the Open eBook Initiative in June 1998, with a 25-people task
force named Open eBook Authoring Group. In September 1999 was released
the first version of the Open eBook (OeB) format, based on XML
(eXtensible Markup Language) and defined by the Open eBook Publication
Structure (OeBPS), with a free version belonging to public domain and a
full version to be used with or without DRM by the publishing industry.

The Open eBook Forum (OeBF) was created in January 2000 as an
industrial consortium (with 85 participants in 2002) to develop the OeB
format and OeBPS specifications. Since 2000, most ebook formats have
derived from the OeB format, for example LIT from Microsoft and PRC
format from Mobipocket.

# LIT from Microsoft

Microsoft launched its own PDA, the Pocket PC, in April 2000, with the
Microsoft Reader, for people to read books in LIT (from "literature")
format, a format based on the OeB format. The Microsoft Reader was also
available for computers in August 2000, and then for any Windows
platform, including for the new Tablets PC launched in November 2002.

Microsoft was billing publishers and distributors for the use of its
DRM technology through the Microsoft Digital Asset Server (DAS), with a
commission on each sale. Microsoft partnered with Barnes & Noble.com in
January 2000 and Amazon.com in August 2000, for them to offer ebooks
for the Microsoft Reader in their eBookStores soon to be launched.
Barnes & Noble.com opened its eBookStore in August 2000, followed by
Amazon in November 2000.

Pocket PC’s first OS, Windows CE, was replaced in October 2001 by
Pocket PC 2002 to handle the reading of copyrighted books. In 2002,
people could read books on three software: Microsoft Reader of course,
Mobipocket Reader and Palm Reader, the software of the Palm Pilot,
launched in March 1996 as the first PDA of the market.

# PRC from Mobipocket

Mobipocket was founded in March 2000 in Paris, France, by Thierry
Brethes and Nathalie Ting, as a company specializing in ebooks for
PDAs, with part of the funding coming from Viventures, a branch of the
French multinational Vivendi.

The Mobipocket format (PRC, based on the OeB format) and the Mobipocket
Reader could be used on any PDA, and also on any computer from April
2002.

In October 2001, the Mobipocket Reader received the eBook Technology
Award from the International Book Fair in Frankfurt, Germany.
Mobipocket partnered with Franklin for the Mobipocket Reader to be
available on the eBookMan along with the Franklin Reader, instead of
the initially planned Microsoft Reader.

The Mobipocket Web Companion was a software (for a fee) for extracting
content from partner news sites. The Mobipocket Publisher was used by
individuals (free version for private use, and standard version for a
fee) or publishers (professional version for a fee) to create ebooks
using the Mobipocket DRM technology for controlling access to
copyrighted ebooks. The Mobipocket Publisher could also create ebooks
in LIT format for the Microsoft Reader.

In spring 2003, the Mobipocket Reader was available in five languages
(French, English, German, Spanish, Italian) and could be used on any
PDA, computer and smartphone. 6,000 titles in several languages were
available on the website of Mobipocket and in online partner
bookstores. Mobipocket was bought by Amazon in April 2005.

# EPUB, a new standard

In April 2005, the Open eBook Forum was replaced with the International
Digital Publishing Forum (IDPF), et OeB was replaced with EPUB, an
acronym for «electronic publication». EPUB allowed the reflowing of
text depending on the size of the screen. Recent PDF files (PDF being
another standard for ebooks) have been compatible with EPUB.



2000 > EXPERIMENTS BY BEST-SELLING AUTHORS


[Summary]
In July 2000 began the electronic self-publishing of “The Plant”, an
epistolary novel by Stephen King, who was the first best-selling author
to launch such an experiment. The author began publishing “The Plant”
in episodes on his own website. The chapters were available at regular
intervals and could be downloaded in several formats (PDF, OeB, HTML,
TXT). After the publication of the sixth chapter in December 2000, the
author decided to stop the experiment, because more and more readers
were downloading the chapters without paying for them. Stephen King
went on with digital experiments though, but in partnership with his
publisher. Digital experiments were also made in Europe in November
2000, by Frederick Forsyth, the British master of thrillers, whose
latest short novels were published online by Online Originals, and by
Arturo Pérez-Reverte, a best-selling Spanish author, whose latest novel
was available online during one month before being available in print.
In Brazil, Paolo Coehlo began offering free PDF versions of his novels
in early 2003.

***

In 2000, Stephen King was the first best-selling author to launch
digital experiments, followed by Frederick Forsyth and Arturo Pérez-
Reverte in Europe and many other then, for example Paolo Coehlo in
Brazil.

# Stephen King

As a first step, Stephen King distributed in March 2000 his short story
“Riding the Bullet” as an electronic file, with 400,000 downloads
during the first 24 hours in the digital bookstores that were selling
it.

In the wake of the media attention that followed, Stephen King launched
its own website in July 2000 to self-publish his epistolary novel “The
Plant” in episodes. The chapters were available at regular intervals
and could be downloaded in several formats (PDF, OeB, HTML, TXT). After
the publication of the sixth chapter in December 2000, the author
decided to stop the experiment, because more and more readers were
downloading the chapters without paying for them.

Stephen King went on with digital experiments though, but in
partnership with his publisher. In March 2001, his novel “Dreamcatcher”
was the first to be launched both in print by Simon & Schuster and as
an ebook in Palm Digital Media, Palm’s digital bookstore. In March
2002, his collection of short stories “Everything’s Eventual” was
launched in print by Scribner, an imprint of Simon & Schuster, and as
an ebook in Palm Digital Media, with an excerpt that could be freely
downloaded.

# Frederick Forsyth

In November 2000, Frederick Forsyth, known as the British master of
thrillers, launched a digital experiment in partnership with Online
Originals, an electronic publisher from London. Online Originals
published “The Veteran” as the first part of “Quintet”, a collection of
five short stories announced in the following order: “The Veteran”,
“The Miracle”, “The Citizen”, “The Art of the Matter” and “Draco”.
Available in three formats to be read on Acrobat Reader, Microsoft
Reader and Glassbook Reader, the short story was sold for 3.99 pounds
(6.60 euros) on the publisher's website, as in several online
bookstores in the United Kingdom (Alphabetstreet, BOL.com, WHSmith) and
in the United States (Barnes & Noble, Contentville, Glassbook). This
experiment didn’t last very long, because sales were far below
expectations.

# Arturo Pérez-Reverte

Arturo Pérez-Reverte, a Spanish novelist, became famous with his series
of novels about the adventures of Capitan Alatriste in the 17th
century. The new title to be released in late 2000 was "El Oro del Rey"
(The King's Gold). In November 2000, the author partnered with his
publisher Alfaguara to publish the novel in digital form for one month,
as a PDF that could be downloaded from a webpage set up for the
occasion on the portal Inicia, before the release of the print version
in bookstores. The novel was available in PDF for 2.90 euros, a much
cheaper price than the 15.10 euros of the forthcoming print book. One
month later, there were 332,000 downloads, but only 12,000 readers who
paid for it. Most readers shared the password with their family and
friends, for them to download the book for free. If the digital
experiment was not good financially, it was very good as a novel
marketing campaign to launch the print book.

# Paulo Coelho

Online experiments were launched by a number of authors then, for
example Paulo Coelho, a best-selling Brazilian novelist who came to be
known worldwide as the author of “The Alchimist”. In early 2003, his
books were translated into 56 languages, with 53 million copies sold in
155 countries. In March 2003, Paulo Coelho decided to distribute PDF
versions of several novels for free in various languages, with the
consent of his publishers, after his readers wrote him they had a hard
time finding his books in some places and countries. He renewed the
same experiment with other titles in spring 2011.



2000 > COTRES.NET, WORKS OF DIGITAL LITERATURE


[Summary]
A writer and musician, Jean-Paul has offered beautiful hypermedia works
on his website cotres.net since October 1998, while searching how
hyperlinks could expand his writing towards new directions. He wrote in
June 2000: "Surfing the web is like radiating in all directions (I am
interested in something and I click on all the links on a home page) or
like jumping around (from one click to another, as the links appear).
You can do this in the written media, of course. But the difference is
striking. So the internet changed how I write. You don't write the same
way for a website as you do for a script or a play. (...) Since then I
write directly on the screen: I use the print medium only occasionally
(...): [in it] the text is developing page after page (most of the
time), whereas the technique of links allows another relationship to
the time and space of imagination. And, for me, it is above all the
opportunity to put into practice this reading/writing 'cycle', whereas
leafing through a book gives only an idea -- which is vague because the
book is not conceived for that."

***

A writer and musician, Jean-Paul has offered beautiful works of digital
literature, while searching how hyperlinks could expand his writing
towards new directions.

In October 1998, he switched from being a print author to being an
hypermedia author, and created cotres.net (“cotres” could be translated
by “cutters” in English) as a website "telling stories in 3D", either
French-language stories or plurilingual stories.

Jean-Paul also enjoyed the freedom of online self-publishing. He
explained in June 2000: "The internet allows me to do without
intermediaries, such as record companies, publishers and distributors.
Most of all, it allows me to crystallize what I have in my head: the
print medium (desktop publishing, in fact) only allows me to partly do
that. (…) Surfing the web is like radiating in all directions (I am
interested in something and I click on all the links on a home page) or
like jumping around (from one click to another, as the links appear).
You can do this in the written media, of course. But the difference is
striking. So the internet changed how I write. You don't write the same
way for a website as you do for a script or a play. (...)

In fact, it is not the internet which changed how I write, it is the
first Mac that I discovered through the self-learning of HyperCard. I
still remember how astonished I was during the month when I was
learning about buttons, links, surfing by analogies, objects or images.
The idea that a simple click on one area of the screen allowed me to
open a range of piles of cards, and each card could offer new buttons
and each button opened on to a new range, etc. In brief, the learning
of everything on the web that today seems really banal, for me it was a
revelation (it seems Steve Jobs and his team had the same shock when
they discovered the ancestor of the Mac in the laboratories of Rank
Xerox).

Since then I write directly on the screen: I use the print medium only
occasionally, to fix up a text, or to give somebody who is allergic to
the screen a kind of photograph, something instantaneous, something
approximate. It is only an approximation, because print forces us to
have a linear relationship: the text is developing page after page
(most of the time), whereas the technique of links allows another
relationship to the time and space of imagination. And, for me, it is
above all the opportunity to put into practice this reading/writing
'cycle', whereas leafing through a book gives only an idea -- which is
vague because the book is not conceived for that."

Jean-Paul insisted on the growing interaction between digital
literature and technology: "The future of cyber-literature, techno-
literature, digital literature or whatever you want to call it, is set
by the technology itself. It is now impossible for an author to handle
all by himself the words and their movement and sound. A decade ago,
you could know well each of Director, Photoshop or Cubase (to cite just
the better known software), using the first version of each. That is
not possible any more. Now we have to know how to delegate, find more
solid financial partners than Gallimard [a major French publisher], and
look in the direction of Hachette-Matra, Warner, and Hollywood. At
best, the status of multimedia director (?) will be the one of video
director, film director, manager of the product. He is the one who
receives the golden palms at Cannes, but who would never have been able
to earn them just on his own. As twin sister (not a clone) of the
cinematograph, cyber-literature (video + the link) will be an industry,
with a few isolated craftsmen on the outer edge (and therefore with
below-zero copyright)."

“Canon laser”, one of Jean-Paul’s literary works, was first published
as a print work using the first ODP software allowing artists to easily
play with the form of letters (as characters). As a follow-up, a
plurilingual hypermedia version was published on cotres.net in 2002.

In July 2011, the home page of cotres.net has given access to three
literary works taking inspiration from both Paris and the whole planet.

“Solstice” (2008), a universal greetings card, is round instead of
rectangular, to celebrate soft round forms versus hurtful rectangular
forms.

“Agression93” (2009) is a short story about a minor attack in the
suburbs, that can be read in four minutes when only using hyperlinks on
the bottom right of the screen to fifteen minutes when searching
hyperlinks with the mouse and clicking on some of them.

“Aux Jardins de Picpus” (2010) is a guided visit of the small gardens
of Picpus in Paris.



2000 > THE ORIGINAL GUTENBERG BIBLE ONLINE


[Summary]
As a sign of the times, with the ebook being nearly 30 years old, a
digitized version of the original Gutenberg Bible was available online
in November 2000 on the website of the British Library. Gutenberg
printed its Bible in 1454 in Mainz, Germany, perhaps printing 180
copies, with 48 copies still available in 2000, and two full copies at
the British Library. As they were a little different, both were
digitized in March 2000 by Japanese experts from Keio University of
Tokyo and NTT (Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Communications). The
images were then processed to offer a full digitized version on the web
a few months later, for the world to enjoy.

***

As a sign of the times, with the ebook being nearly 30 years old, a
digitized version of the original Gutenberg Bible was available online
in November 2000 on the website of the British Library.

# The Gutenberg Bible

In 2000, the digital book was nearly 30 years old. It was born in July
1971 with eText #1 of Project Gutenberg.

The print book was five centuries and a half old. Gutenberg printed its
Bible in 1454 in Mainz, Germany, perhaps printing 180 copies, with 48
copies still available in 2000, and two full copies at the British
Library. As they were a little different,  both were digitized in March
2000 by Japanese experts from Keio University of Tokyo and NTT (Nippon
Telegraph and Telephone Communications). The images were then processed
to offer a full digitized version on the web a few months later, for
the world to enjoy.

# The ebook in late 2000

In late 2000, thousands of public domain works were freely available on
the web in digital libraries.

A number of bookstores and publishers had their own websites. Some of
them were born online, with all their transactions made through the
internet.

Alongside their traditional tasks of lending books or other documents,
and offering a collection of reference works, librarians helped their
patrons to navigate the web without being drowned, organized a
selection of websites for them, and created their own websites with an
online catalog and a digital library.

More and more books and periodicals were “only” digital, skipping the
cost of a print version. From “static” in print books, information
become “fluid” on the internet, and regularly updated.

Many authors were using the internet to seek information, disseminate
their work, exchange with their readers and collaborate with other
creators.

Some authors began searching how using hyperlinks could expand their
writing towards new directions, creating hypermedia novels and sites of
hyperfiction, while mixing text, image and sound.

Academic and scientific publishers began to reorganize their work and
favor online publishing, with prints versions only on demand. Some
universities made their own textbooks with a selection of chapters and
articles from a database, as well as comments from professors.

The internet became mandatory to find information, communicate, access
documents, and broaden our knowledge. People no longer needed to run
after information. Information was there, by the numbers, available on
our screen, often at no cost, including for those who studied in a
remote place, lived in the countryside, worked at home or were stuck in
a bed.

The web became a gigantic encyclopedia, a extensive library, a huge
bookstore and a full medium on its own.

Some people even read a book on the screen of a computer, a PDA or a
(still very expensive) ebook reader.



2001 > BROADBAND BECAME THE NORM


[Summary]
Henk Slettenhaar has extensive knowledge of communication technology,
with a long career in Geneva, Switzerland, and California. In 1992, he
founded the Swiss Silicon Valley Association (SVA) and, since then, has
been taking study groups to Silicon Valley, San Francisco and other
high-tech areas. Henk wrote in July 2001: “I am experiencing a
tremendous change with having a ‘broadband’ connection at home. To be
connected at all times is so completelely different from dial-up. I now
receive email as soon as it arrives, I can listen to my favorite radio
stations wherever they are. I can listen to the news when I want to.
Get the music I like all the time. (…) The only thing which is missing
is good quality real time video. The bandwidth is too low for that.”
Ten years later, Henk has watched real time video, and read ebooks in
the Kindle and the iPad.

***

Henk Slettenhaar has extensive knowledge of communication technology,
with a long career in Geneva, Switzerland, and California. Ten years
after getting a broadband connection at gome, he reads ebooks on a
Kindle or an iPad.

Henk joined CERN (European Organization for Nuclear Research) in Geneva
in 1958 to work with the first digital computer. He was involved in the
development of CERN's first digital networks.

His U.S. experience began in 1966 when he joined a team at SLAC
(Stanford Linear Accelerator Center) for 18 months to build a film
digitizer. Returning to SLAC in 1983, he designed a digital monitoring
system, which was used for more than ten years.

For 25 years he tought information technology at Webster University,
Geneva. He is the former head of the Telecom Management Program created
in fall 2000. He also worked as a consultant for a number of
international organizations.

# In 1992

In 1992, with an extensive experience in Switzerland and California,
Henk founded the Swiss Silicon Valley Association (SVA) and, since
then, has been taking study groups to Silicon Valley, San Francisco and
other high-tech areas like Los Angeles, Finland and China. These study
tours include visits to outstanding companies, start-up, research
centers and universities, with the aim of exploring new developments in
information technology such as the internet, multimedia and
telecommunications. Participants have the opportunity to learn about
state-of-the-art research and development, strategies and business
ventures through presentations and discussions, product demonstrations
and site tours.

# In 1998

Henk wrote in December 1998: “I can't imagine my professional life
without the internet. Most of my communication is now via email. I have
been using email for the last 20 years, most of that time to keep in
touch with colleagues in a very narrow field. Since the explosion of
the internet, and especially the invention of the web, I communicate
mainly by email. Most of my presentations are now on the web and the
courses I teach are all web-extended. All the details of my Silicon
Valley tours are on the web. Without the internet we wouldn't be able
to function. And I use the internet as a giant database. I can find
information today with the click of a mouse.”

# In 2000

The year 2000 was marked by “the explosion of mobile technology. The
mobile phone has become for many people, including me, the personal
communicator which allows you to be anywhere anytime and still be
reachable. But the mobile internet is still a dream. The new services
on mobile (GSM) phones are extremely primitive and expensive (WAP =
Wait and Pay).”

# In 2001

What has happened since one year? Henk wrote in July 2001: “I am
experiencing a tremendous change with having a ‘broadband’ connection
at home. To be connected at all times is so completelely different from
dial-up. I now receive email as soon as it arrives, I can listen to my
favorite radio stations wherever they are. I can listen to the news
when I want to. Get the music I like all the time. (…) The only thing
which is missing is good quality real time video. The bandwidth is too
low for that.

I now have a wired and a wireless LAN [Local Area Network] in my home.
I can use my laptop anywhere in the house and outside, even at the
neighbors and still being connected. With the same technology I am now
able to use my wireless LAN card in my computer when I travel. For
instance, during my recent visit to Stockholm, there was connectivity
in the hotel, the conference center, the airport and even in the Irish
pub!

# In 2011

Ten years later, in June 2011, Henk explained: “I have always followed
the development of ebooks with much interest, as a professor in
communication systems and an organizer of study tours in Silicon
Valley. I didn’t use them much during 40 years, because of the lack of
progress in reading devices. I never liked reading a book on a computer
or PDA. Now, with tablets like the Kindle of the iPad, I am finally
reading ebooks. I see a huge expansion of digital reading with tablets
that are easy to use and with a very large choice of ebooks thanks to
electronic commerce and companies like Amazon.”

What has he been working on lately? “I am a serial entrepreneur who is
creating a start-up in the field of mobility. I use the internet all
the time to find partners and ideas. We also use online books to learn
the art of innovation!”



2001 > WIKIPEDIA, A COLLABORATIVE ENCYCLOPEDIA


[Summary]
Wikipedia was launched in January 2001 by Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger
(Larry resigned later on) as a global free collaborative online
encyclopedia, financed by donations, with no advertising. Its website
is a wiki, which means that anyone can write, edit, correct and improve
information throughout the encyclopedia, with people contributing under
a pseudonym. The articles stay the property of their authors, and can
be freely used according to Creative Commons or GFDL (GNU Free
Documentation License). Wikipedia quickly became the largest reference
website. It was in the top ten websites in December 2006, and in the
top five websites in 2008. In May 2007, Wikipedia had 7 million
articles in 192 languages, including 1.8 million articles in English,
589,000 articles in German, 500,000 articles in French, 260,000
articles in Portuguese, and 236,000 articles in Spanish. Wikipedia
celebrated its tenth anniversary in January 2011 with 17 million
articles in 270 languages et 400 million individual visits per month
for all websites.

***

Wikipedia was launched in January 2001 by Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger
(Larry resigned later on) as a global free collaborative online
encyclopedia.

Wikipedia was financed by donations, with no advertising. Its website
is a wiki, which means that anyone can write, edit, correct and improve
information throughout the encyclopedia, with people contributing under
a pseudonym. The articles stay the property of their authors, and can
be freely used according to Creative Commons or GFDL (GNU Free
Documentation License).

Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, founded in June 2003,
which has run a number of other projects, beginning with Wiktionary
(launched in December 2002) and Wikibooks (launched in June 2003),
followed by Wikiquote, Wikisource (texts from public domain), Wikimedia
Commons (multimedia), Wikispecies (animals and plants), Wikinews and
Wikiversity (textbooks).

Wikipedia quickly became the largest reference website, with thousands
of people contributing worldwide. In December 2004, Wikipedia had 1.3
million articles by 13,000 contributors in 100 languages. In December
2006, Wikipedia was among the top ten sites on the web, with 6 million
articles. In May 2007, Wikipedia had 7 million articles in 192
languages, including 1.8 million articles in English, 589,000 articles
in German, 500,000 articles in French, 260,000 articles in Portuguese,
and 236,000 articles in Spanish. In 2008, Wikipedia was in the top five
websites. In September 2010, Wikipedia had 14 million articles in 272
languages, including 3.4 million articles in English, 1.1 million
articles in German and 1 million articles in French. Wikipedia
celebrated its tenth anniversary in January 2011 with 17 million
articles in 270 languages et 400 million individual visits per month
for all websites.

Wikipedia also inspired many other projects over the years, for example
Citizendium, launched in 2007 as a pilot project to build a new
encyclopedia.

Citizendium, an acronym for “The Citizen’s Compendium”, was launched in
March 2007 at the initiative of Larry Sanger, who co-founded Wikipedia
with Jimmy Wales in January 2001, but resigned later on over policy and
content quality issues, as well as the use of anonymous pseudonyms.

Citizendium is a wiki project open to public collaboration, but
combining "public participation with gentle expert guidance". The
project is experts-led, not experts-only. Contributors use their own
names, and they are guided by expert editors. As explained by Larry in
his essay "Toward a New Compendium of Knowledge", posted in September
2006 and updated in March 2007: "Editors will be able to make content
decisions in their areas of specialization, but otherwise working
shoulder-to-shoulder with ordinary authors." There are also constables
who make sure the rules are respected.

There were 1,100 high-quality articles, 820 authors, and 180 editors in
March 2007, 11,800 articles in August 2009, and 15,000 articles in
September 2010. Citizendium wants to act as a prototype for upcoming
large scale knowledge-building projects that would deliver reliable
reference, scholarly and educational content.



2001 > THE CREATIVE COMMONS LICENSE


[Summary]
Long after copyleft, a term invented in 1984 by Richard Stallmann, a
computer scientist at MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology),
Creative Commons (CC) was founded in 2001 by Lawrence "Larry" Lessig, a
professor at Stanford Law School, California. As explained on its
website in 2009: "Creative Commons is a nonprofit corporation dedicated
to making it easier for people to share and build upon the work of
others, consistent with the rules of copyright. We provide free
licenses and other legal tools to mark creative work with the freedom
the creator wants it to carry, so others can share, remix, use
commercially, or any combination thereof." Who has used Creative
Commons? O’Reilly Media for example, as well as Wikipedia and the
Public Library of Science (PLoS). There were one million Creative
Commons licensed works in 2003, 4.7 million works in 2004, 20 million
works in 2005, 50 million works in 2006, 90 million works in 2007, 130
million works in 2008, and 350 million works in April 2010.

***

The web allowed people to distribute their works globally, thus the
need for a Creative Commons license, created in 2001 to make it “easier
for people to share and build upon the work of others”. Copyleft showed
the way as early as 1984.

# Copyleft

The term "copyleft" was invented in 1984 by Richard Stallman, a
computer scientist at MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology). As
explained on the GNU Project’s website: "Copyleft is a general method
for making a program or other work free, and requiring all modified and
extended versions of the program to be free as well. (...) Copyleft
says that anyone who redistributes the software, with or without
changes, must pass along the freedom to further copy and change it.
Copyleft guarantees that every user has freedom. (...) Copyleft is a
way of using the copyright on the program. It doesn't mean abandoning
the copyright; in fact, doing so would make copyleft impossible. The
word 'left' in 'copyleft' is not a reference to the verb 'to leave' --
only to the direction which is the inverse of 'right'. (...) The GNU
Free Documentation License (FDL) is a form of copyleft intended for use
on a manual, textbook or other document to assure everyone the
effective freedom to copy and redistribute it, with or without
modifications, either commercially or non commercially."

# Creative Commons

Creative Commons (CC) was founded in 2001 by Lawrence “Larry” Lessing,
a professor at Stanford Law School, California. As explained on its
website: "Creative Commons is a nonprofit corporation dedicated to
making it easier for people to share and build upon the work of others,
consistent with the rules of copyright. We provide free licenses and
other legal tools to mark creative work with the freedom the creator
wants it to carry, so others can share, remix, use commercially, or any
combination thereof."

# How has used Creative Commons?

O’Reilly Media, founded by Tim o’Reilly in 1978 to publish computer and
high-tech books, began using the Creative Commons Founders’ Copyright
in 2003.

Launched in 2001 as a free online collaborative encyclopedia, Wikipedia
has offered articles that stay the property of their authors, and can
be freely used according to Creative Commons or GFDL (GNU Free
Documentation License).

The Public Library of Science (PLoS) has used a Creative Commons
license for the articles of its free online scientific and medical
journals launched in 2003. The articles can be freely redistributed and
reused, including for translations, as long as the author(s) and source
are cited.

There were one million Creative Commons licensed works in 2003, 4.7
million works in 2004, 20 million works in 2005, 50 million works in
2006, 90 million works in 2007, 130 million works in 2008, and 350
million works in April 2010.



2003 > HANDICAPZÉRO, THE INTERNET FOR EVERYONE


[Summary]
An important issue is the need for information to be accessible to all.
Available online in September 2000, the website Handicapzéro became a
portal in February 2003 to offer an adapted access to information for
the French-speaking users having a visual problem, i.e. over 10% of the
population. Blind users can access the site using a Braille device or a
speech software. Visually impaired users can set up their own
parameters (size and type of fonts, color of background, etc.) to surf
the web in an optimal way, by creating and modifying their own visual
profile. Any user can correspond in Braille with blind users through
the website. 2 million visitors used the services of the portal in
2006. Handicapzero intends to demonstrate “that, with the respect of
some basic rules, the internet can finally become a space of freedom
for all.”

***

An important issue is the need for information to be accessible to all,
as shown by the portal Handicapzéro launched in February 2003 for any
French-speaking user having a visual problem.

A first website was launched in September 2000 to provide an adapted
access to information for blind or visually impaired users, i.e. over
10% of the population. It quickly became the most visited adapted site
in France, with 10,000 visits per month.

In February 2003, Handicapzéro launched a portal providing free access
to national and international news in real time (in partnership with
Agence France-Presse), sports news (with the newspaper L’ Équipe), TV
programs (with the magazine Télérama), weather (with the service Météo
France) and a search engine (with Google), as well as a range of
services for health, employment, consumer goods, leisure, sports and
telephony.

Blind users can access the site using a Braille device or a speech
software. Visually impaired users can set up their own parameters (size
and type of fonts, color of background, etc.) to surf the web in an
optimal way, by creating and modifying their own visual profile. This
profile can be used for any text available on the web, by copying and
pasting the text on the web interface. Any user can correspond in
Braille with blind users through the website. Handicapzéro provides a
free transcription of the letters and prints them in Braille, before
sending them by mail for free in Europe.

2 million visitors used the services of the portal in 2006.
Handicapzéro intends to demonstrate “that, with the respect of some
basic rules, the internet can finally become a space of freedom for
all.”

Things are not as simple for an adapted access to books. Patrice
Cailleaud, director of communication for Handicapzéro, explained in
January 2001 that, if the digital book is “a new complementary solution
to the problems experienced by blind and visually impaired users, (…)
there are still issues with the copyright legislation and with
permissions from authors that prevent us to offer Braille versions or
large print versions. The requests for permissions are scarce and long,
and seldom work.”

Thus the need for national laws in the wake of an international
copyright law for visually impaired users. In the European Union, the
directive 2001/29/EC dated May 2001 on “the harmonisation of certain
aspects of copyright and related rights in the information society”
insists in its article 43 on the need for all member states to adopt
measures favoring access to books for the handicapped users that can’t
use standard books, especially by promoting accessible formats. Ten
years later, there is still a lot to do.



2003 > THE PUBLIC LIBRARY OF SCIENCE


[Summary]
The Public Library of Science (PLoS) was founded in October 2000 in
California as a non-profit organization whose mission was to give
access to the world's scientific and medical literature. In early 2003,
PLoS created a non-profit scientific and medical publishing venture to
provide scientists and physicians with free high-quality, high-profile
online journals in which to publish their work. The journals were PLoS
Biology (launched in 2003), PLoS Medicine (2004), PLoS Genetics (2005),
PLoS Computational Biology (2005), PLoS Pathogens (2005), PLoS Clinical
Trials (2006), and PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases (2007), the first
scientific journal on this topic. All PLoS articles are freely
available online, on the websites of PLoS and in the public archive
PubMed Central, run by the National Library of Medicine. The articles
can be freely redistributed and reused under a Creative Commons
license, including for translations, as long as the author(s) and
source are cited.

***

Founded in October 2000, the Public Library of Science (PLoS) created a
non-profit scientific and medical publishing venture in early 2003, to
provide scientists and physicians with free high-quality, high-profile
online journals in which to publish their work.

# PLoS as a catalyst

With the internet being a powerful medium to disseminate information,
it seems quite outrageous that the results of research -- original
works requiring many years of efforts -- are "squatted" by publishers
claiming ownership on these works, and selling them at a high price.
The work of researchers is often publicly funded, especially in North
America. It would therefore seem appropriate that the scientific
community and the general public can freely enjoy the results of this
research. 1,000 new scientific and medical articles reviewed by peers
were published daily in 2000, with few of them free available on the
internet.

The Public Library of Science (PLoS) was founded in October 2000 in San
Francisco, California, as a non-profit organization whose mission was
to make the world’s scientific and medical literature a public resource
in free online archives. Instead of information disseminated in
millions of reports and thousands of online journals, a single point
would give access to the full content of these articles, with a search
engine and hyperlinks between articles.

PLoS posted an open letter requesting the articles presently published
by journals to be distributed freely in online archives, and asking
researchers to promote the publishers willing to support this project.
From October 2000 to September 2002, the open letter was signed by
30,000 scientists from 180 countries. The publishers' answer was much
less enthusiastic, although a number of publishers agreed for their
articles to be distributed freely immediately after publication, or six
months after publication. But even the publishers who initially agreed
to support the project made so many objections that it was finally
abandoned.

# PLoS as a publisher

Another objective of PLoS was to become a publisher while creating a
new model of online publishing based on free dissemination of
knowledge. In early 2003, PLoS created a non-profit scientific and
medical publishing venture to provide scientists and physicians with
free high-quality, high-profile journals in which to publish their
work. The journals were PLoS Biology (launched in 2003), PLoS Medicine
(2004), PLoS Genetics (2005), PLoS Computational Biology (2005), PLoS
Pathogens (2005), PLoS Clinical Trials (2006) and PLoS Neglected
Tropical Diseases (2007), the first scientific journal on this topic.

All PLoS articles are freely available online, on the websites of PLoS
and in the public archive PubMed Central, run by the National Library
of Medicine. The articles can be freely redistributed and reused under
a Creative Commons license, including for translations, as long as the
author(s) and source are cited. PLoS also launched PLoS ONE, an online
forum where people can publish articles on any subject relating to
science or medicine.

Three years after they were created, PLoS Biology and PLoS Medicine had
the same reputation for excellence as the leading journals Nature,
Science and The New England Journal of Medicine. PLoS received
financial support from several foundations  while developing a viable
economic model from fees paid by published authors, advertising,
sponsorship, and paid activities organized for PLoS members. PLoS also
hopes to encourage other publishers to adopt the open access model, or
to convert their existing journals to an open access model.



2004 > THE WEB 2.0, COMMUNITY AND SHARING


[Summary]
The term "web 2.0" was invented in 2004 by Tim O'Reilly, a publisher of
computer books, as a title for a series of conferences he was
organizing. The web 2.0 has been based on community and sharing, with a
wealth of websites whose content has been supplied by users, such as
blogs, wikis, social networks and collaborative encyclopedias.
Wikipedia, Facebook and Twitter, of course, but also tens of thousands
of others. The web 2.0 may begin to fulfill the dream of Tim Berners-
Lee, who invented the web in 1990, and wrote in an essay dated April
1998: "The dream behind the web is of a common information space in
which we communicate by sharing information. Its universality is
essential: the fact that a hypertext link can point to anything, be it
personal, local or global, be it draft or highly polished. ("The World
Wide Web: A very short personal history", available on his webpage on
the W3C website)

***

The term "web 2.0" was invented in 2004 by Tim O'Reilly, a publisher of
computer books, as a title for a series of conferences he was
organizing.

The web 2.0 was based on community and sharing, with a wealth of
websites whose content was supplied by users, such as blogs, wikis,
social networks and collaborative encyclopedias. Wikipedia, Facebook
and Twitter, of course, but also tens of thousands of others.

The web 2.0 may begin to fulfill the dream of Tim Berners-Lee, who
invented the web in 1990, and wrote in April 1998 in an essay: "The
dream behind the web is of a common information space in which we
communicate by sharing information. Its universality is essential: the
fact that a hypertext link can point to anything, be it personal, local
or global, be it draft or highly polished.” ("The World Wide Web: A
very short personal history", available on his webpage on the W3C
website)

The first blog was launched in 1997. A blog is an online diary kept by
a person or a group, usually in reverse chronological order, and can be
updated every minute or once a month. There were 14 million blogs
worldwide in July 2005, with 80,000 new blogs per day. According to
Technorati, the first blog search engine, there were 65 million blogs
in December 2006, with 175,000 new blogs per day. Some blogs are
devoted to photos (photoblogs), music (audioblogs or podcasts), and
videos (vlogs or videoblogs).

The wiki concept became quite popular in 2000. Deriving from the
Hawaiian term "wiki" ("fast"), a wiki is a website allowing multiple
users to collaborate online on the same project. Users can contribute
to drafting content, editing it, improving it, and updating it. The
software can be simple or more elaborate. A simple program handles text
and hyperlinks. With a more elaborate program, one can embed images,
charts, tables, etc. The most famous wiki is Wikipedia.

Facebook was founded in February 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg and his fellow
students as a social network. Originally created for the students of
Harvard University, it was then available to students from any
university in the U.S. before being open to anyone worldwide in
September 2006, to connect with relatives, friends and strangers.
Facebook was the second most visited website after Google, with 500
million users in June 2010, while sparking debates on privacy issues.

Founded in 2006 by Jack Dorsey and Biz Stone, Twitter is a social
networking and micro-blogging tool to send free short messages of 140
characters maximum, called tweets, via the internet, IM or SMS.
Sometimes described as the SMS of the internet, Twitter gained
worldwide popularity, with 106 million users in April 2010, and 300,000
new users per day. As for tweets, there were 5,000 per day in 2007,
300,000 in 2008, 2.5 million in 2009, 50 million in January 2010, and
55 million in April 2010, with the archiving of public tweets by the
Library of Congress as a reflection of the trends of our time.

We now try to fullfill the second part of Tim Berners-Lee’s dream,
according to his essay dated April 1998: “There was a second part of
the dream, too, dependent on the web being so generally used that it
became a realistic mirror (or in fact the primary embodiment) of the
ways in which we work and play and socialize. That was that once the
state of our interactions was online, we could then use computers to
help us analyze it, make sense of what we are doing, where we
individually fit in, and how we can better work together."



2005 > FROM PDAS TO SMARTPHONES


[Summary]
In April 2001, there were 17 million PDAs versus 100,000 ebook readers
worldwide, according to a Seybold Report available online. The Palm
Pilot was launched as the first PDA in March 1996, with 23 million Palm
Pilots sold between 1996 and 2002. Palm stayed the leader -- 36.8% of
PDAs were Palm Pilots in 2002 -- despite a fierce competition from
Microsoft’s Pocket PC and the PDAs of Hewlett-Packard, Sony,
Handspring, Toshiba and Casio. The main platforms were Palm OS (for 55%
of PDAs) and Pocket PC (for 25,7% of PDAs). People reading on PDAs
could read on Mobipocket Reader (available in March 2000), Microsoft
Reader (April 2000), Palm Reader (March 2001), Acrobat Reader (May 2001
for Palm Pilot, and December 2001 for Pocket PC), and finally Adobe
Reader (May 2003), that replaced Acrobat Reader to read both standard
PDF files and secure PDF files of copyrighted books. PDAs were then
replaced by smartphones, from the Nokia 9210 in 2001 to the iPhone in
April 2007.

***

In April 2001, there were 17 million PDAs versus 100,000 ebook readers
worldwide, according to a Seybold Report available online. In 2005,
PDAs were replaced with smartphones.

# The Palm Pilot

The Palm Pilot was launched as the first PDA in March 1996, with 23
million Palm Pilots sold between 1996 and 2002. In July 2002, the Palm
Reader was also available for computers, and Palm Digital Media, Palm’s
digital bookstore (later renamed Palm eBook Store), was offering 5,500
ebooks in several languages. 10,000 ebooks were available in 2003.

Some book professionals were worried about reading on such a small
screen, whereas PDA users found that the screen size wasn't a problem
at all to read a good book on a pocket-size multifunction device.

# The eBookMan

Franklin’s eBookMan was a handheld device to read books on the Franklin
Reader, with standard PDA functions (calendar, voice recorder, etc.).
In October 2000, the device received the eBook Technology Award at the
International Book Fair in Frankfurt, Germany. Three models (EBM-900,
EBM-901, EBM-911) were available in early 2001, with a RAM size of 8 or
16 MB, and a backlit or not LCD screen. The screen was large compared
to other handheld devices, but only in black and white, unlike the
Pocket PC and some Palm Pilots. People could also listen to audiobooks
and MP3 music files. In October 2001, the eBookMan offered the
Mobipocket Reader alongside the Franklin Reader, and the Franklin
Reader was also available for the Pocket PC and for models from Psion,
Palm and Nokia. Franklin developed a digital bookstore while partnering
with other companies, for example with Audible.com to access its
collection of 4,500 audiobooks.

# Other PDAs

Palm stayed the leader – 36.8% of PDAs were Palm Pilots in 2002 --
despite a fierce competition from Microsoft’s Pocket PC and from the
PDAs of Hewlett-Packard, Sony, Handspring, Toshiba and Casio. The main
platforms were Palm OS (for 55% of PDAs) and Pocket PC (for 25,7% of
PDAs).

People reading on their PDAs could use Mobipocket Reader (available
since March 2000), Microsoft Reader (April 2000), Palm Reader (March
2001), Acrobat Reader (May 2001 for Palm Pilot, and December 2001 for
Pocket PC), and finally Adobe Reader (May 2003) that replaced Acrobat
Reader to read both standard PDF files and secure PDF files of
copyrighted books.

Publishers began to digitize their books and sell digital versions
online in various formats (LIT, PRC, PDF, OeB), on their own websites
or in the digital bookstores of Amazon, Barnes & Noble, Palm,
Mobipocket, Numilog, and the likes.

# Smartphones

In 2004, prices of PDAs began to drop, with the leaders still being
Palm, Sony and Hewlett-Packard. People began buying smartphones instead
of PDAs. The first smartphone was Nokia 9210, launched as early as 2001
with a Symbian platform , and followed by Nokia Series 60, Sony
Ericsson P800, and the smartphones of Motorola and Siemens. Sony
stopping selling PDAs in February 2005. 3,7% of cellphones sold in 2004
were smartphones. 9% of cellphones sold in 2006 were smartphones, with
90 million smartphones sold for one billion cell phones. Apple launched
the iPhone in June 2007 in the U.S., in late 2007 in Europe and in 2008
in Asia.

Would people prefer reading on mobile handsets like the iPhone 3G (with
its Stanza Reader) or the T-Mobile G1 (with Google's platform Android
and its reader), or would they prefer using ebook readers? Was there a
market for both smartphones and ebook readers? These were some of the
fascinating issues discussed at the time.



2005 > FROM GOOGLE PRINT TO GOOGLE BOOKS


[Summary]
Google launched Google Print in May 2005, followed by Google Books in
August 2006, while struggling with associations of authors and
publishers. The beta version of Google Print went live in May 2005,
with: (a) a project aimed at publishers, launched in October 2004; and
(b) a project intended for libraries, launched in December 2004. Three
months later, Google Print was stopped until further notice because of
lawsuits filed by associations of authors and publishers for copyright
infringement. The program resumed in August 2006 under the new name of
Google Books. Google Books started offering books digitized in the
participating libraries (Harvard, Stanford, Michigan, Oxford,
California, Virginia, Wisconsin-Madison, Complutense of Madrid, and New
York Public Library), with either the full text for public domain books
or excerpts for copyrighted books. Other libraries joined then. Google
also tried to settle a lawsuit with associations of authors and
publishers in October 2008. A agreement has not be reached yet (as of
July 2011).

***

Google launched Google Print in May 2005, followed by Google Books in
August 2006, while struggling with associations of authors and
publishers.

The beta version of Google Print went live in May 2005, after two
earlier steps. In October 2004, Google launched the first part of
Google Print as a project aimed at publishers, for internet users to be
able to see excerpts of books and order them online. In December 2004,
Google launched the second part of Google Print as a project intended
for libraries, to build up a digital library of 15 million books by
digitizing the collections of major partner libraries, beginning with
the libraries of the Universities of Michigan (7 million books),
Harvard, Stanford and Oxford, and the New York Public Library. The
planned cost in 2004 was an average of US $10 per book, and a total
budget of $150 to $200 million for ten years. Three months later,
Google Print was stopped until further notice because of lawsuits filed
by associations of authors and publishers for copyright infringement.

The program resumed in August 2006 under the new name of Google Books.
The participating libraries now also included the libraries of the
Universities of California, Virginia, and Wisconsin-Madison, and the
Complutense of Madrid. Google Books provided a full text for public
domain books, and excerpts for copyrighted books. According to some
media buzz, Google was scanning 3,000 books a day.

After three years of conflict, Google reached a settlement in October
2008 with associations of authors and publishers, with an agreement to
be signed during the next years. The inclusion of copyrighted works in
Google Books had been widely criticized by authors and publishers
worldwide. In the U.S., lawsuits were filed by the Authors Guild and
the Association of American Publishers (AAP) for alleged copyright
infringement. The assumption was that the full scanning and digitizing
of copyrighted books infringed copyright laws, even if only snippets
were made freely available, whereas Google thought this was "fair use",
referring to short excerpts from copyrighted books that could be
lawfully quoted in another book or website, as long as the source
(author, title, publisher) was mentioned.

As of December 2008, Google had 24 library partners, including a Swiss
one (University Library of Lausanne), a French one (Lyon Municipal
Library), a Belgian one (Ghent University Library), a German one
(Bavarian State Library), two Spanish ones (National Library of
Catalonia, and University Complutense of Madrid), and a Japanese one
(Keio University Library). The U.S. partner libraries were, per
alphabetical order: Columbia University, Committee on Institutional
Cooperation (CIC), Cornell University Library, Harvard University, New
York Public Library, Oxford University, Princeton University, Stanford
University, University of California, University of Michigan,
University of Texas at Austin, University of Virginia, and University
of Wisconsin-Madison.



2005 > THE OPEN CONTENT ALLIANCE, A UNIVERSAL LIBRARY


[Summary]
Starting with an idea from the Internet Archive, the Open Content
Alliance (OCA) was launched in October 2005 as a global effort from a
group of cultural, technology, non profit, and governmental
organizations to build “a digital archive of global content for
universal access” and offer a permanent repository of multilingual text
and multimedia content. The first 100,000 ebooks were available in the
Internet Archive in December 2006, with 12,000 new ebooks posted per
month. Unlike Google Books, OCA books are searchable and downloadable
through any web search engine, and don’t include copyrighted books,
unless the copyright holder has expressly given permission. The first
contributors to OCA were the University of California, the University
of Toronto, the European Archive, the National Archives in United
Kingdom, O'Reilly Media, and the Prelinger Archives. One million ebooks
were available in the Internet Archive in December 2008, and two
million ebooks in March 2010.

***

Starting with an idea from the Internet Archive, the Open Content
Alliance (OCA) was launched in October 2005 as a effort to build “a
digital archive of global content for universal access”.

The goal was to offer a permanent repository of multilingual text and
multimedia content. The first 100,000 ebooks were available in the
Internet Archive in December 2006, with 12,000 new ebooks posted per
month.

What exactly is the Internet Archive? Founded in April 1996 by Brewster
Kahle in San Francisco, California, the Internet Archive is a non-
profit organization that has built an "internet library" to offer
permanent access to historical collections in digital format for
researchers, historians and scholars. An archive of the web has been
stored every two months or so since 1996, and has been freely available
through the Wayback Machine since October 2001. As "a nonprofit digital
library dedicated to providing universal access to human knowledge",
the Internet Archive has also become a digital library of text, audio,
software, image and video content.

As explained in 2007 on the OCA website, OCA "is a collaborative effort
of a group of cultural, technology, nonprofit, and governmental
organizations from around the world that helps build a permanent
archive of multilingual digitized text and multimedia material. An
archive of contributed material is available on the Internet Archive
website and through Yahoo! and other search engines and sites. The OCA
encourages access to and reuse of collections in the archive, while
respecting the content owners and contributors."

Unlike Google Books, OCA books are searchable and downloadable through
any web search engine, and don’t include copyrighted books, unless the
copyright holder has expressly given permission. The first contributors
to OCA were the University of California, the University of Toronto,
the European Archive, the National Archives in United Kingdom, O'Reilly
Media, and the Prelinger Archives.

In 2006, Microsoft, while being one of the OCA partners, began
developing its own digital library. The beta version of Microsoft Live
Search Books was released in December 2006, with a collection of non
copyrighted books digitized by Microsoft in partner libraries. The
first partner libraries were the British Library and the libraries of
the Universities of California and Toronto, followed in January 2007 by
the New York Public Library and Cornell University Library. Books
offered full text views, with a search by keyword, and could be
downloaded as PDF files. In May 2007, Microsoft announced agreements
with several publishers, for example Cambridge University Press and
McGraw Hill, for their books to be available in Live Search Books.
After digitizing 750,000 books and indexing 80 million journal
articles, Microsoft ended the Live Search Books program in May 2008 and
closed the website. All the digitized books were transferred into the
OCA collection of the Internet Archive.

The OCA collection offered one million books in December 2008, and two
million books in March 2010.



2006 > THE UNION CATALOG WORLDCAT ON THE WEB


[Summary]
In August 2006, WorldCat, a union catalog run by OCLC (Online Computer
Library Center), began migrating to the web with a version available
for free. OCLC was founded as early as 1971 as a non-profit
organization dedicated to furthering access to the world's information
while reducing information costs. In 2005, WorldCat had 61 million
bibliographic records in 400 languages, provided by 9,000 member
libraries in 112 countries. In 2006, 73 million bibliographic records
were linking to one billion documents available in these libraries.
Through the current worldcat.org, member libraries have provided free
access to their catalogs, and free or paid access to their electronic
resources: books, audiobooks, abstracts and full-text articles, photos,
music CDs, and videos. In April 2010, 1,5 billion documents could be
located and/or accessed using WorldCat. The other main union catalog
was run by RLG (Research Librairies Group), that merged with OCLC in
November 2006.

***

In August 2006, WorldCat, a union catalog run by OCLC (Online Computer
Library Center), began migrating to the web with a version available
for free.

WorldCat followed the steps of RLG (Research Libraries Group), that
launched the free web version of the RLG Union Catalog, called
RedLightGreen, in fall 2003, with a full version available in spring
2004.

OCLC and RLG were running the two largest union catalogs in the world.

What exactly is a union catalog? The idea behind a union catalog is to
earn time by avoiding the cataloging of the same document by many
catalogers worldwide. When catalogers of a member library (paid
subscription) process a new document, they first search the union
catalog. If the record is available, they import it into their own
catalog and add the local data. If the record is not available, they
create it in their own catalog and export it into the union catalog,
for the new record to be instantly available to all catalogers of
member libraries. Depending on their status and experience, member
libraries can either import records only, or both import and export
records.

OCLC (Online Computer Library Center) was created in 1971 as a non-
profit organization dedicated to furthering access to the world's
information while reducing information costs. The OCLC Online Union
Catalog, later renamed WorldCat, was first the union catalog of the
university libraries in the State of Ohio, before becoming a national
library cooperative and then an organization spreading worldwide, with
WorldCat becoming one of the two largest union catalogs in the world
(the other one being RLIN). In early 1998, WorldCat had 38 million
records in 400 languages, and 27,000 member libraries in 65 countries,
with 2 million records added annually.

WorldCat only accepted one bibliographic record per document, unlike
RLIN, launched by RLG in 1980, that accepted several records per
document, with 88 million records in early 1998. RLG members were
mainly research and specialized libraries. RLIN was later renamed the
RLG Union Catalog. Its free web version RedLightGreen was launched in
fall 2003 as a beta version, and in spring 2004 as a full version.

In the meantime, WorldCat had 61 million bibliographic records in 400
languages in 2005, from 9,000 member libraries in 112 countries. In
2006, 73 million bibliographic records were linking to one billion
documents available in these libraries.

In August 2006, WorldCat began migrating to the web with the beta
version of its new website worldcat.org. Member libraries have provided
free access to their catalogs, and free or paid access to their
electronic resources: books, audiobooks, abstracts and full-text
articles, photos, music CDs and videos. RedLightGreen closed its site
in November 2006, and RLG merged with OCLC. In April 2010, 1,5 billion
documents could be located and/or accessed using WorldCat.



2007 > THE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF LIFE, A GLOBAL EFFORT


[Summary]
The Encyclopedia of Life (EOL) was launched in May 2007 as a global
scientific effort to document all known species of animals and plants
(1.8 million), including endangered species, and expedite the millions
of species yet to be discovered and cataloged (6 to 8 million). The
encyclopedia's honorary chair is Edward Wilson, professor emeritus at
Harvard University, who, in an essay dated 2002, was the first to
express the wish for such an encyclopedia. Technology improvements made
it possible five years later with content aggregators, mash-up, wikis,
and large scale content management. The multimedia encyclopedia has
gathered texts, photos, maps, sound, and videos, with a webpage for
each species, to provide a single portal for millions of documents
scattered online and offline.  The first pages were available in mid-
2008. The encyclopedia will be translated into other languages with the
help of partner organizations.

***

The Encyclopedia of Life was launched in May 2007 as a global
scientific effort to document all known species of animals and plants.

There are 1.8 million species, including endangered species, and
millions of species yet to be discovered and cataloged, probably 6 to 8
million.

This collaborative effort is led by several main institutions: Field
Museum of Natural History, Harvard University, Marine Biological
Laboratory, Missouri Botanical Garden, Smithsonian Institution,
Biodiversity Heritage Library (BHL).

The initial funding came from the MacArthur Foundation (US $10 million)
and the Sloan Foundation ($2.5 million). A $100 million funding over
ten years will be necessary before self-financing.

The encyclopedia's honorary chair is Edward Wilson, professor emeritus
at Harvard University, who, in an essay dated 2002, was the first to
express the wish for such an encyclopedia. Technology improvements made
it possible five years later, with content aggregators, mash-up, wikis,
and large scale content management.

Based on the work of thousands of experts around the globe, the
multimedia encyclopedia will gather texts, photos, maps, sound and
videos, with a webpage for each species. It will provide a single
portal for millions of documents scattered online and offline. As a
teaching and learning tool for a better understanding of our planet,
the encyclopedia will reach everyone: researchers, teachers, students,
pupils, media, policy makers, and the general public, who will be able
to contribute in a wiki-style environment, with contributions checked
by experts.

As a consortium of the ten largest life science libraries, with other
libraries to join in the future, the Biodiversity Heritage Library
(BHL) started the digitization of 2 million documents from public
domain spanning over 200 years. In May 2007, when the project was
officially launched, 1.25 million pages were already digitized in
London, Boston and Washington D.C., and available in the Internet
Archive.

The first pages of the encyclopedia were designed in 2007, and
available in mid-2008. The encyclopedia should be fully "operational"
in 2012 and completed with all known species in 2017. People will be
able to use the encyclopedia as a "macroscope" to identify major trends
from a considerable stock of information -- in the same way they use a
microscope for the study of detail. The English version will be
translated in several languages by partner organizations.



2007 > THE FUTURE OF EBOOKS SEEN FROM FRANCE


[Summary]
Marc Autret, a journalist and graphic designer, wrote in December 2006:
"I am convinced that the ebook has a great future in all non-fiction
sectors. I refer to the ebook as a software and not as a dedicated
physical medium (the conjecture is more uncertain on this point). (…)
Non-commercial ebooks are already emerging everywhere while opening the
way to new developments. To my eyes, there are at least two emerging
trends: (a) an increasingly attractive and functional interface for
reading/consultation (navigation, research, restructuring on the fly,
user annotations, interactive quiz); (b) a multimedia integration
(video, sound, animated graphics, database) now strongly coupled to the
web. No physical book offers such features. So I imagine the ebook of
the future as a kind of wiki crystallized and packaged in a given
format. How valuable will it be? Its value will be the one of a book:
the unity and quality of editorial work!"

***

In late 2006, I launched an inquiry about how people were seeing the
future of ebooks. Here are the answers from Pierre Schweitzer, Denis
Zwirn and Marc Autret, three French “pioneers” in their own fields.

Pierre Schweitzer is the inventor of the @folio project, a mobile
device for texts. He wrote in December 2006: "The luck we all have is
to live this fantastic change here and now. When I was born in 1963, a
computer memory could only hold a few pages of characters. Today, my
music player could hold billions of pages, a true local library.
Tomorrow, by the combined effect of the Moore Law and the ubiquity of
networks, we will have instant access to works and knowledge. We won't
be much interested any more on which device to store information. We
will be interested in handy functions and beautiful objects."

Denis Zwirn is the founder of Numilog, the main French-language digital
bookstore. He wrote in August 2007: "The digital book is not any more a
topic for symposiums, conceptual definitions, or divination by some
'experts'. It is a commercial product and a tool for reading. There is
no need to wait for some new hypermodern and hypertextual tool
carefully orchestrating its specificity from the print book. We need to
offer books that can be easily read on any electronic device used by
customers, sooner or later with an electronic ink display. And to offer
them as an industry. The digital book is not, and will never be, a
niche product (dictionaries, travel guides, books for the blind). It is
becoming a mass market product, with multiple forms, like the
traditional book."

After being a journalist specialized in publishing, multimedia and
copyright, Marc Autret is a graphic designer working with publishers.
He wrote in December 2006: "I am convinced that the ebook has a great
future in all non-fiction sectors. I refer to the ebook as a software
and not as a dedicated physical medium (the conjecture is more
uncertain on this point). The [European] publishers of guides,
encyclopedias and informative books in general still see the ebook as a
very minor variation of the printed book, probably because the business
model and secure management don't seem entirely stabilized. But this is
a matter of time. Non-commercial ebooks are already emerging everywhere
while opening the way to new developments.

To my eyes, there are at least two emerging trends: (a) an increasingly
attractive and functional interface for reading/consultation
(navigation, searching, restructuring on the fly, annotations of the
user, interactive quiz); (b) a multimedia integration (video, sound,
animated graphics, database) now strongly coupled to the web. No
physical book offers such features. So I imagine the ebook of the
future as a kind of wiki crystallized and packaged in a given format.
How valuable will it be? Its value will be the one of a book: the unity
and quality of editorial work!"

Marc was not happy about the “competition” between PDF and EPUB. He
added in June 2011: “I do regret that the emergence of EPUB has led to
the outright annihilation of PDF as a format for digital books. The
fact that interactivity elements available within the PDF are not
supported by the current mobile platforms has removed any possibility
of experimenting new things in this direction, that had seemed very
promising to me. While print publishing gives place to many different
objects, ranging from the carefully designed art book to the basic book
for everyday reading, the ebook market has grown from the start on a
totalitarian and segregationist mode, comparable to a war between
operating systems, rather than favoring a technical and cultural
emulation. Because of this, there are few PDF digital books benefiting
from the opportunities given by this format.

In the unconscious collective mind, PDF has stayed a kind of static
duplicate of the print book, and nobody wants to see any other fate for
him. The EPUB format, which is nothing but a combination of XHTML/CSS
(admittedly with JavaScript prospects), consists in putting the digital
book 'in phase with' the web. This is a technology that has favored
structured content, but hasn’t favored typographic craft at all. It has
given a narrow vision of the digital work, reducing it to a flow of
information. We don’t measure it yet, but the worst cultural disaster
in recent decades has been the advent of XML, as a language that pre-
calibrates and contaminates the way we think our hierarchies. XML and
its avatars go on locking us in the cultural invariants of the Western
world.”



2010 > FROM THE LIBRIÉ TO THE IPAD


[Summary]
After a quiet time in the early 2000s, ebook readers “took off” again,
from the Librié launched by Sony in April 2004 to the iPad launched by
Apple in April 2010. The first dedicated ebook readers were the Rocket
eBook (1998), the SoftBook Reader (1998) and the Gemstar eBook
(November 2000), which didn’t last long. Lighter ebook readers storing
more books showed up with new E Ink displays, for exemple Librié from
Sony (April 2004), Cybook 2nd generation (June 2004), Sony Reader
(September 2006), Kindle from Amazon (November 2007), and Nook from
Barnes & Noble (November 2009). Competition has been fierce with
smartphones (from 2005) and with the iPad from Apple (April 2010). Some
readers are now eager to read multimedia/hypermedia content and stories
in 3D on flexible devices.

***

After a quiet time in the early 2000s, ebook readers “took off” again,
from the Librié launched by Sony in April 2004 to the iPad launched by
Apple in April 2010.

The first dedicated ebook readers were the Rocket eBook (1998), the
SoftBook Reader (1998) and the Gemstar eBook (November 2000), which
didn’t last long. Lighter ebook readers storing more books showed up
with new E Ink displays, for example the Librié from Sony (April 2004),
the Cybook 2nd generation (June 2004), the Sony Reader (September
2006), the Kindle from Amazon (November 2007), and the Nook from Barnes
& Noble (November 2009). Competition has been fierce with smartphones
(from 2005) and with the iPad from Apple (April 2010).

# The Librié (Sony)

Sony launched its first ebook reader, Librié 1000-EP, in Japan in April
2004, in partnership with Philips and E Ink. Librié was the first ebook
reader to use a 6-inch E Ink screen, with a 10 M memory, and a 500-
ebook storage capacity. Ebooks were downloaded from a computer with a
USB cable.

# The Cybook (Bookeen)

After a Cybook 1st generation launched in January 2001 by Cytale as the
first European ebook reader, the Cybook project was taken over by
Bookeen, a company created in 2003 by Michael Dahan and Laurent Picard,
two former engineers from Cytale. A Cybook 2nd generation was available
in June 2004. The Cybook Gen3 (3rd generation) was launched in July
2007, with a E Ink display.

# The Sony Reader

Sony Reader was launched in October 2006 in the U.S. as the first ebook
reader using the latest E Ink screen technology, The screen gave “an
excellent reading experience very close to that of real paper, making
it very easy going on the eyes" (Mike Cook, editor of epubBooks.com).
Another major feature of the reader was its battery life, with over
7,000 pages turns -- or up to two weeks of power – on just one battery
charge. It was also the first ebook reader to use Adobe Digital
Editions. It was available then in Canada, United Kingdom, Germany and
France.

# The Kindle (Amazon)

Amazon launched Kindle, its own ebook reader, in November 2007, with a
6-inch E Ink display, and page-turning buttons. Books could be
downloaded via the device's 3G wireless connection, with no need for a
computer, unlike the Sony Reader. A thinner Kindle 2 was launched in
February 2009, with a storage capacity of 1,500 ebooks and a new text-
to-speech feature. The Kindle DX was launched in  May 2009 with a
larger 9.7-inch screen for newspapers and magazines.

# The Nook (Barnes & Noble)

Barnes & Noble launched Nook, its own ebook reader, in November 2009.
Based on the Android platform, the original device included a 6-inch E
Ink display, with WiFi and 3G connectivity. A new WiFi-only device was
launched in June 2010. The Nook Color was launched in October 2010,
with a larger 7-inch LCD display, for the viewing of magazines and
picture books. The website of Barnes & Noble offered 2 million ebooks
in November 2010. A lighter Nook with a 6-inch E Ink tactile display
was released in May 2011.

# The iPad (Apple)

Apple launched the iPad, its multifunctional tablet, in the U.S. in
April 2010, with an iBookstore of 60,000 ebooks. The iPad was available
in a few European countries in June 2010. After the iPod (launched in
October 2001) and the iPhone (launched in January 2007), two cult
devices for a whole generation, Apple has also become a key player for
digital books. The iPad 2 was launched in March 2011 in the U.S. and
two weeks later internationally.

There are many other ebook readers and tablets, but I will stop there.
Some of my friends now wait to read multimedia / hypermedia content and
stories in 3D on flexible devices.



2011 > THE EBOOK IN TEN POINTS


[Summary]
Here is a conclusion in the form of quotes. The dates indicated here
are the dates when these texts - excerpts from email interviews - were
written and first published. Their authors are Michael Hart (August
1998), John Mark Ockerbloom (September 1998), Robert Beard (October
1998), Jean-Paul (June 2000), Nicolas Pewny (February 2003), Marc
Autret (December 2006), Pierre Schweitzer (January 2007), Denis Zwirn
(August 2007), Catherine Domain (April 2010) and Henk Slettenhaar (June
2011).

***

Here is a conclusion in the form of quotes. The dates indicated here
are the dates when these texts - excerpts from email interviews - were
written and first published.

# August 1998

"We consider etext to be a new medium, with no real relationship to
paper, other than presenting the same material, but I don't see how
paper can possibly compete once people each find their own comfortable
way to etexts, especially in schools." (Michael Hart, founder of
Project Gutenberg in 1971)

# September 1998

“I've gotten very interested in the great potential the net has had for
making literature available to a wide audience. (…) I am very excited
about the potential of the internet as a mass communication medium in
the coming years. I'd also like to stay involved, one way or another,
in making books available to a wide audience for free via the net,
whether I make this explicitly part of my professional career, or
whether I just do it as a spare-time volunteer." (John Mark Ockerbloom,
founder of The Online Books Page in 1993)

# October 1998

"The web will be an encyclopedia of the world by the world for the
world. There will be no information or knowledge that anyone needs that
will not be available. The major hindrance to international and
interpersonal understanding, personal and institutional enhancement,
will be removed. It would take a wilder imagination than mine to
predict the effect of this development on the nature of humankind."
(Robert Beard, founder of A Web of Online Dictionaries in 1995)

# June 2000

"Surfing the web is like radiating in all directions (I am interested
in something and I click on all the links on a home page) or like
jumping around (from one click to another, as the links appear). You
can do this in the written media, of course. But the difference is
striking. So the internet changed how I write. (...) I have finally
found in online publishing the mobility and fluidity I was seeking.”
(Jean-Paul, founder of the hypermedia website cotres.net in 1998)

# February 2003

"I see the digital book of the future as a 'full work' putting together
text, sound, images, video and interactivity: a new way to design, and
write, and read, perhaps on a single book, constantly renewed, which
would contain everything we have read, a single and multiple companion.
Utopian? Improbable? Maybe not that much!" (Nicolas Pewny, founder of
Editions du Choucas in 1992)

# December 2006

“There are at least two emerging trends [in the digital book]: (a) an
increasingly attractive and functional interface for
reading/consultation (navigation, searching, restructuring on the fly,
annotations of the user, interactive quiz); (b) a multimedia
integration (video, sound, animated graphics, database) now strongly
coupled to the web. No physical book offers such features. So I imagine
the ebook of the future as a kind of wiki crystallized and packaged in
a given format. How valuable will it be? Its value will be the one of a
book: the unity and quality of editorial work!" (Marc Autret, graphic
designer and founder of the website Indiscripts in 2009)

# January 2007

"The luck we all have is to live this fantastic change here and now.
When I was born in 1963, a computer memory could only hold a few pages
of characters. Today, my music player could hold billions of pages, a
true local library. Tomorrow, by the combined effect of the Moore Law
and the ubiquity of networks, we will have instant access to works and
knowledge. We won't be much interested any more on which device to
store information. We will be interested in handy functions and
beautiful objects." (Pierre Schweitzer, designer of the @folio project
in 1996)

# August 2007

"The digital book is not any more a topic for symposiums, conceptual
definitions, or divination by some 'experts'. It is a commercial
product and a tool for reading. (…) We need to offer books that can be
easily read on any electronic device used by customers, sooner or later
with an electronic ink display. And to offer them as an industry. The
digital book is not, and will never be, a niche product (dictionaries,
travel guides, books for the blind). It is becoming a mass market
product, with multiple forms, like the traditional book." (Denis Zwirn,
founder of the digital bookstore Numilog in 2000)

# April 2010

"The internet has taken more and more space in my life! On 1st April
2010, I became a publisher after some painful training in Photoshop,
InDesign, and other software. (…) In the end, there will always be
unexpected developments to new inventions, among other things. When I
started using the internet [in 1999], I really didn't expect to become
a publisher." (Catherine Domain, founder of Librairie Ulysse in 1971)

# June 2011

“I never liked reading a book on a computer or PDA. Now, with tablets
like the Kindle of the iPad, I am finally reading ebooks. I see a huge
expansion of digital reading with tablets that are easy to use and with
a very large choice of ebooks thanks to electronic commerce and
companies like Amazon. (…) I also use online books to learn the art of
innovation!” (Henk Slettenhaar, founder of the Swiss Silicon Valley
Association in 1992)


Copyright © 2011 Marie Lebert






End of Project Gutenberg's The eBook is 40 (1971-2011), by Marie Lebert

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EBOOK IS 40 (1971-2011) ***

***** This file should be named 36985-0.txt or 36985-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/9/8/36985/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the
PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a
registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything
for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may
use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative
works, reports, performances and research. They may be modified and
printed and given away--you may do practically ANYTHING with public
domain eBooks. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,
especially commercial redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder.  Information on
the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use
imposed by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the
beginning of this work.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

http://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
http://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
